[Amit Varma]: Sometimes I wonder what it would be like to live in a borderless world. By that I don't
[Amit Varma]: just mean borders between nation states like the horrendous Ratcliffe line, but also borders
[Amit Varma]: of taxonomy and categorization, which divide people and ossify traditions. What would it
[Amit Varma]: be like to be an unbridled seeker, to be able to pick up your bags and go on a journey without
[Amit Varma]: worrying about visas or passport controls, to enter into dialogues with people where
[Amit Varma]: your intellectual quest is your only agenda and barriers of birth and ethnicity and class
[Amit Varma]: and identity don't matter? Well, it turns out that a few centuries ago, a man today
[Amit Varma]: known as Guru Nanak did just that. He traveled to places that are today dispersed across
[Amit Varma]: nine countries, and he traveled not as a founder of a faith as we know him today, but as a
[Amit Varma]: seeker in search of truth and dialogue. Things have changed since then. Centuries have passed.
[Amit Varma]: The brutalities of history have created walls between us, not just on land, but in our hearts
[Amit Varma]: and minds. In such a situation, I wonder what would happen if someone attempted to retrace
[Unknown]: the path of Guru Nanak? Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics,
[Amit Varma]: politics, and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma. Welcome to The Scene
[Amit Varma]: and the Unseen. My guest for today's show is Amardeep Singh, who was for most of his
[Amit Varma]: adult life, a fat cat MBA busy being a corporate satrap. But then he gave it up at one point
[Amit Varma]: to travel through Sikh sites in Pakistan or other Nanak Panti sites, and we'll explain
[Amit Varma]: the distinction soon, and produced two books called The Lost Heritage and The Quest Continues,
[Amit Varma]: as well as two documentaries on these travels. These will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: He is now engaged in a hugely ambitious process, that of retracing the travels of Guru Nanak
[Amit Varma]: across what is today nine countries. This is all coming together in a documentary series
[Amit Varma]: called Allegory, a tapestry of Nanak's travels. Before I begin my conversation with Amardeep
[Amit Varma]: though, let's take a quick commercial break. If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the
[Amit Varma]: Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the show alive. The Scene and the Unseen has been
[Amit Varma]: a labor of love for me. I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding
[Amit Varma]: my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours as well. But while the work has been its own
[Amit Varma]: reward, I don't actually make much money off the show. Although The Scene and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken up to the insane engagement level of
[Amit Varma]: podcasts. I do many many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself. Scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves
[Amit Varma]: you. My proposition for you is this. For every episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can
[Amit Varma]: do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice. This is not a subscription. The Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free
[Amit Varma]: on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in. This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help
[Amit Varma]: keep this thing going. sceneunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Amardeep, welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you Amit for giving this opportunity. Really appreciate being here with you.
[Amit Varma]: Amardeep, you know, before we get started, tell me a little bit about your history and
[Amit Varma]: how you came to this because I was sort of, you know, when I first heard about this project,
[Amit Varma]: when we were both invited to the Vidarbha Literary Festival, a month or so ago, I presume
[Amit Varma]: you must be a professor of history or something of that sort. And then I look at your bio
[Amit Varma]: and I'm like, wait, MBA from Chicago? And, you know, what's going on?
[Guest]: You know, life has its own ways of manifesting and taking you in different strands. Yes,
[Guest]: it's a non-traditional path. I'm walking a path of an unstructured life today, trying
[Guest]: to give it a structure. But then I've spent, like everyone else, good 25 years of my life
[Guest]: in a structured environment of the corporate world, right? And I educated as I was studying
[Guest]: at Dune School. I did my engineering, did a University of Chicago MBA, worked at Larson
[Guest]: and Toubro, Crompton Greaves, and then gone to American Express where I spent 21 years.
[Guest]: I was a regional head for Asia Pacific. All this period was a very structured life, nine
[Guest]: to five, nine to nine, you know, fall it whatever it was. You had hierarchy, structure, and
[Guest]: that's what you were doing. You were one piece in the big jigsaw puzzle, that's it. And then
[Guest]: something happened in 2014. And I walked out of the corporate world, actually not knowing
[Guest]: what was going to happen in the days to come. But I walked out with a bit of an egoistic
[Guest]: attitude because my, in corporate world you do, your egos are very high and that's how
[Guest]: you succeed, right? And I walked out because my job was moving to Australia and I didn't
[Guest]: want to go, period. So I thought, you know. You were based in Singapore, you are based
[Guest]: in Singapore. Yeah. So I started from India. I was in Hong Kong and then 20 years I've
[Guest]: been in Singapore. 2014, I walked away saying that I'll, at the peak of my career in the
[Guest]: corporate world, I'll get something else. But that was not meant to be. And when I was
[Guest]: going through that process, I would be lying to myself if I would say that I was not disillusioned.
[Guest]: I was heavily disillusioned. The treadmill had stopped. I was still, my mind was running
[Guest]: at the same pace and I didn't understand what was happening. In fact, for a few months I
[Guest]: was lying on my bed just looking at, observing the fan going in the one direction and trying
[Guest]: to see why it rotates in the other direction visually, right? But you didn't understand,
[Guest]: right? But then now when I look at my life, we are now in 2020. So 2014, 2020, good five
[Guest]: to six years have passed by. I can rationalise now everything that has happened. But in the
[Guest]: moment there was no rationalisation. And the rationalisation now is that I'm walking on
[Guest]: an unstructured path, not knowing that the projects that are manifesting in my mind,
[Guest]: we're walking those paths and giving structures to those projects because you have to do an
[Guest]: unstructured approach to get the data. The short of it all is that when I walked out,
[Guest]: what people don't realise is you just can't make a change one fine day. Because you try
[Guest]: and do the change in one fine day from an MBA engineering background to presumably you're
[Guest]: thinking I'm an historian. I'm not. Neither am I an anthropologist. Neither am I. I'm
[Guest]: a, I'm a theologian, right? Neither I'm a photographer, but I'm neither I'm a videographer
[Guest]: or neither am I a filmmaker, but I'm doing all that, right? So how does that happen?
[Guest]: This change will not happen one day. If it happens one day, you will be totally disoriented.
[Guest]: You'll not be able to manage it. What people don't realise is the process behind it unconsciously
[Guest]: that was happening for 30 years that led you to this change on one fine day. And I can
[Guest]: now look back and see the structure in that, in that process. And I do give this message
[Guest]: to the youth is that I always say that don't follow your passion. Most of the people say
[Guest]: that follow your passion in today's world. I said, don't follow your passion. You will
[Guest]: not succeed. Create your passion. There's a huge difference between following and creating
[Guest]: because when you're following, you don't really have a structure behind it. You don't juice
[Guest]: it out. You're just following it because sake of following, you're just filling in your
[Guest]: gaps, right? When you create a passion, then you are going to become the passion. So when
[Guest]: I was in the corporate world or before that in college, I mean, I, I had this habit of
[Guest]: just picking up something. It could be anything. I was picking up history and I was just kind
[Guest]: of juicing it out at the age of 17 years. I started reading history good at five to
[Guest]: six years into the reading of history for the regions that interested me was Punjab,
[Guest]: Kashmir, Afghanistan. I juiced it out. I lost interest. And then my corporate career started
[Guest]: and I got spiritually oriented. I delved into the scriptures of my own faith and then the
[Guest]: Sikh faith. And then I delved into many of the scriptures, juiced it out. Then I got
[Guest]: into music, juiced it out in four or five years. I stopped at one fine day. I had this
[Guest]: habit of just stopping at one fine day when I think the challenge.
[Guest]: And when you got into music, what do you mean? I started studying musicology and then slowly
[Guest]: started playing and understanding the Granth Sahib's, you know, rock systems. So the Indian
[Guest]: classical system, then that led me to understanding the verses a bit deeper, but I just suddenly
[Guest]: stopped it in five years time. And I stopped it at a time where I lost faith in the elusive
[Guest]: divine, the big power. I lost faith because certain events that were happening in my life.
[Guest]: And I always say losing faith is important because it allows you to then delve deeper
[Guest]: and then re-emerge with a new faith, which could be different. And I lost faith and I
[Guest]: found answers in Kabir's verse in Granth Sahib. You know, Kabir says, Khalak, Khalak. God is
[Guest]: in creation. Creation is God himself. So what are you looking for? What is this quest of
[Guest]: yours?
[Guest]: When I realized that, actually, I just dropped dead everything and I picked up the camera
[Guest]: and I started appreciating the creation itself. In a short time, my photography reached a
[Guest]: certain level. And then I realized that many photographers contribute to magazines, but
[Guest]: they seldom are able to express their deeper insights, what went behind the photographs.
[Guest]: So I started doing those travel writings with a deeper spiritual insights and then magazines
[Guest]: started picking them up. What I'm trying to tell you is then all these skill sets were
[Guest]: parallelly prepared while I was in the corporate world doing nine to nine job and I was doing
[Guest]: it unconsciously. And then came 2014 when I walked out because of a certain decision.
[Guest]: I thought, I don't want to move to Australia. I'll stay in Singapore, not realizing that
[Guest]: that was not meant to be. The door was going to be shut. And when the door was shut, these
[Guest]: manifestations, these skills that I had acquired over layers by creating passions successfully
[Guest]: in a successful period, I would look back and I would find the next passion just behind
[Guest]: me and I would pick it up, you know, because you prepared yourself with one and you just
[Guest]: turn back and the next purpose is right behind you. You pick it up. You have built it up
[Guest]: to a level where in 2014, I just thought, let me go to Pakistan. And the story starts
[Guest]: from there that just going to Pakistan leads to where I am today.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fascinating journey. And I have some related thoughts. One, of course, is I couldn't
[Amit Varma]: agree with you more about follow your passion being a dangerous piece of advice, like on
[Amit Varma]: a note totally unrelated to you. What I often find is that when people say follow your passion,
[Amit Varma]: they have in, they fall for what is known as a survivor bias, that they'll see someone
[Amit Varma]: who is very successful, having followed their passion. And they don't realize that if it's
[Amit Varma]: a creative field, especially 99% of the people aren't going to be that person, they're not
[Amit Varma]: going to make it that far. And, you know, the cafes at Warsaw, which I frequent are
[Amit Varma]: full of people who have been struggling for years, even decades in the film industry here.
[Amit Varma]: So I, you know, I kind of see it all around me, it's sort of dangerous advice to give.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also fascinating how and you've described this before on how you built up to where you
[Amit Varma]: are layer upon layer. And you've just described those layers of history, photography, sort
[Amit Varma]: of musicology, and you know, which is also now another piece falls into place in terms
[Amit Varma]: of understanding your work, because in your documentaries, also, there is so much very
[Amit Varma]: interesting and apt use of music before we get to you know, you're going to Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: and how that journey for which the rest of your life seems to have been a preparation
[Amit Varma]: at that point, before we get to how that journey began, and so on. Let's take a quick diversion,
[Amit Varma]: because you mentioned Kabir's phrase about, you know, the creator being in everything
[Amit Varma]: all around us. And you have also spoken in the past about how people have this misconception
[Amit Varma]: of Nanak's religion as being monotheism when it's actually monism. And what Kabir's phrase
[Amit Varma]: seems to express is also monism of a sort. Can you elaborate a little bit on that?
[Guest]: I think now we're getting into theology. It's an interesting point. I hear you. I hear you.
[Guest]: I mean, I was born with nothing in my mind. I was conditioned by my society, my parents,
[Guest]: what's right, what's wrong. And we all go through the process, right? And one fine day,
[Guest]: you start delving into the path yourself. And then you go to ask yourself these questions.
[Guest]: Am I being, have I been taught the right thing all this time? And one of the things that
[Guest]: I realized in my journeys is that Nanak has not been really understood. Nanak wrote in
[Guest]: our Indic language. He's a master of languages. The Granth Sahib, if you see, there are, people
[Guest]: think it's Punjabi. Sorry, if you know Punjabi and try to read Granth Sahib, you'll not understand
[Guest]: head or tail. It's a composite of languages from Bengal when Jaidev is writing, Namdev
[Guest]: from Maharashtra is writing, Farid from Pakpattan is writing in Pakistan. It's Seraki, it's
[Guest]: Bengali, Sanskrit, it's Punjabi. Kurmukhi is a mere script, which we confuse, we don't
[Guest]: get into it. It's an amalgamation of many languages. Kabir from UP, Bihar area is writing
[Guest]: in it. So what I'm trying to say is that when you look at this whole composite, you find
[Guest]: this has been compiled in the time of the Bhakti movement. And Bhakti movement, there
[Guest]: are two strands. One is from the Indic faith. I will not brand this into Hinduism or something
[Guest]: else because Indic faiths were bigger, right? So Indic faiths had many systems inside it.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the Darshan Shastra of the Indian philosophical system, you know,
[Guest]: they have Sankhya, Yoga, Vedanta and so on and so forth. One of the branch is that everything
[Guest]: is one. And then there are many other branches, right? And everything has space. Sufism came
[Guest]: from Islam and got amalgamated within the Indus belt into what became the, Islam got
[Guest]: amalgamated and became the Islamic version of Bhakti, which is Sufism, right? So we've
[Guest]: seen all this churning happening. And Nanak walks in this land of the Indus river. So
[Guest]: Nanak is talking in his verses about various languages. And then we have the Britishers
[Guest]: who come into the India and they give us the gift of English language and they translate
[Guest]: our texts. And we today, without delving into the deeper values of our own texts, have started
[Guest]: looking at translations to define who we are. You can do it. There's nothing wrong with
[Guest]: translations, but translations have limitations. So when I've gone through all this understanding
[Guest]: of Nanak, I've not found a single book. I'm making a statement here. I've found not a
[Guest]: single book, say this, that has described in English what his philosophy truly was.
[Guest]: So Nanak is always described as he was the one who founded the monotheistic religion,
[Guest]: Sikhism and so on and so forth. Well, he didn't find, he didn't found anything. He just was
[Guest]: a man on quest, right? But monotheism is a concept that comes from Abrahamic faiths and
[Guest]: Abrahamic faiths being Christianity, Judaism and Islam, where they say God is one. It's
[Guest]: up there, right? There's a son of God, there's children of God, but children cannot be God.
[Guest]: God cannot be children. Like what Kabir says, God is in the creation, creation is God. It's
[Guest]: one ecosystem. Nanak says before Onkar, he writes a numeral one. Why didn't he write
[Guest]: two? Why didn't he write something else? One cannot as a numeral and he writes numeral.
[Guest]: One numeral cannot be two or cannot be three or cannot be four, right? One means one. And
[Guest]: he's emphasising that this entire Onkar is one. We are one. Ek Onkar is one ecosystem
[Guest]: and that one ecosystem primarily means you are me, I'm you, we are all one. That is not
[Guest]: monotheism. That's monism. And there's not a single book that says Nanak was the advocate
[Guest]: of monism. Because when you go down that path to understand Nanak, why did he put the numeral
[Guest]: one in the starting of the scripture of Granth Sahib? You understand, in the Granth Sahib
[Guest]: also there's a verse of Bhagat Ravi Das. I mean, I don't believe in any caste system,
[Guest]: but we need to actually bring that in because people, that's how they understand. Now Ravi
[Guest]: Das was a chamar, but yet he had profound verses. And he says, what's the difference
[Guest]: between you and me? He's asking a question. Now it can be you Amit and me, or it could
[Guest]: be the divine in me. Gold and the bracelet, substratum is the gold. The bracelet is a
[Guest]: form or Jal Tarang, you know, waves on the base ocean. There's no difference. So Nanak
[Guest]: is an advocate of monism. And that's the piece that has been not understood. I think that's
[Guest]: the piece that you were asking about. So Kabir voices the same thing. Ravi Das voices the
[Guest]: same thing. Farid voices the same thing. And that's why Nanak consolidated all their voices
[Amit Varma]: into the scripture that became Granth Sahib. And it's also, you know, picking up from what
[Amit Varma]: you said, it's also very interesting. And something I've discussed in previous episodes
[Amit Varma]: with Manu Pillay and Madhvi Menon, among others, something that Sanjay Chakraborty has written
[Amit Varma]: a very good book called The Truth About Ourselves, which is that what we think of as Hinduism
[Amit Varma]: is actually Brahmanism. It's a very ossified version of it, just one belt of it. And you
[Amit Varma]: know, you correctly spoke of it as the Indic religions or the Indic traditions. And what
[Amit Varma]: essentially happened was that when the British came here in an effort to understand this
[Amit Varma]: deeply complex universe that they had thrown themselves in of, you know, our subcontinent,
[Amit Varma]: they created simplifying narratives, often with the help of the local elites, who obviously
[Amit Varma]: pushed what suited them. So you suddenly had a certain version of Hinduism, which is more
[Amit Varma]: like Brahmanism with an ossified view of the caste system, a very simplistic varna kind
[Amit Varma]: of thing. Thrust in and the tragedy is that today we look back at that as if that is Hinduism
[Amit Varma]: and as if that is a definitive truth. While the truth is that many of the Britishers who
[Amit Varma]: created these narratives not only knew very little, but someone like James Mill hadn't
[Amit Varma]: even been to India at the time he wrote what has now become a foundational text about India
[Amit Varma]: for us through kind of osmosis. And, you know, and in a sense, I find that that has also
[Amit Varma]: happened in the popular consciousness with Sikhism, whereas people now think of Sikhism
[Amit Varma]: as something different from Hinduism or something completely apart and the truth is, and I found
[Amit Varma]: out the beautiful metaphor of this in the Indus belt in the Indus River, which you have
[Amit Varma]: described as a place where faiths melted into each other, you know, tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: more about sort of the culture of that belt and how like you point out Sufism, Bhakti,
[Amit Varma]: what we'll talk about later as Nanak Manthi are all part of the same traditions.
[Guest]: Yeah, so the Indic belief systems had the beauty of coexistence of varieties of thoughts.
[Guest]: Rather than giving my understanding of it, let me quote you the source because primary
[Guest]: sources cannot be disputed, right? And I'll give you two quotes. Let's start with Kabir
[Guest]: himself, who finds, I mean, Guru Granth Sahib, the Sikh scripture, is the largest repository
[Guest]: of Kabir's writings. Bijak comes much later. That's the place which is the largest repository.
[Guest]: And Kabir says a very interesting thing. So you brought in the Indus. So I'm going to
[Guest]: make a statement and bring Indus inside that. Kabir says, Hindu, Turak, Dohu ko samjao.
[Guest]: I'm explaining to both Hindu and Turak. Okay, so let's step back for a moment. Why is he
[Guest]: not saying Hindu, Musalman, Dohu ko samjao? If he's talking about religions, then he should
[Guest]: say Hindu, Musalman, Dohu ko samjao. He's saying Hindu, Turak, Dohu ko samjao. Now today's
[Guest]: context when I use the word Turak, the present generation immediately gravitates to Turkey
[Guest]: and I say, you just got it wrong. Turkey is a nation in the modern state, right? Turak,
[Guest]: Babur was a Turak, right? Lodi was a Turak. Turak is a civilization that had its unique
[Guest]: characteristics that existed on the west of the Sindhu River Indus. There was a civilization
[Guest]: that existed on its east. So Sindhu River was a defining boundary where two cultures
[Guest]: met. And of course, when you meet, you amalgamate, right? So what are the peculiarities of the
[Guest]: two cultures? Let's start with language. On the west of it, it's language from right to
[Guest]: left. On the east of it, it's left to right. 180 degrees. On the west of it, it's monotheism.
[Guest]: It's an Abrahamic faith. There's only one God and God cannot be creation. All right.
[Guest]: Come on the east of it. There's a potpourri of belief systems and everything can coexist,
[Guest]: the Indic belt. And therefore people get confused. Monotheism is also a part of it, but it's
[Guest]: a subset of it. Monism is also a part of it. Multitudes are also a part of it, but that's
[Guest]: the Indic belt. And to understand that, let me pick up the second verse from Nanak himself.
[Guest]: He says, chhe ghar, chhe gur, chhe updesh. What is this six? If you delve into the Indic
[Guest]: Darshan Shastra, the philosophical system, the philosophy system of the Indian subcontinent,
[Guest]: you'll understand the Darshan Shastra classifies our historically, the old philosophical system
[Guest]: into six pillars, right? I'll not get into depth of it, but it's divided into six pillars.
[Guest]: And it's a depth of study of six pillar system, right? Chhe ghar, there are six philosophical
[Guest]: systems. Chhe gur, unke chhe guru hai. Chhe updesh. Each philosophical system has a different
[Guest]: updesh. One is monism inside it. Chhe ghar, chhe gur, chhe updesh. Then he says, gur gur
[Guest]: eko. Guru ka guru eki hai. Gur gur eko, ves anek. Ves anek hai. Then he says, he gives
[Guest]: his final line in that. Chhe ghar, chhe gur, chhe updesh. Gur gur eko, ves anek. Baba je
[Guest]: ghar karte keerat hoi. Karta jo, uski keerat, uski sifat sala ho. Praises. Chhe ghar, whichever
[Guest]: home, so ghar lakh vada hi tohi. Wohi ghar vada hai, wohi vada hai. So what he's saying
[Guest]: is accepting everything. Nanak is accepting everything. But what he's saying is a profound
[Guest]: statement of the bhakti culture that was emerging at the time when Nanak walked with Baba Farid
[Guest]: 250 years before him. Jaidev in Bengal, Namdev here in Mirashtra. They were all somehow getting
[Guest]: connected and they were the proponents of the bhakti system. So he's talking about,
[Guest]: in this Indic system, all was coexisting. That's what I'm trying to say. So he's talking
[Guest]: about Kabir who's defining a boundary and Nanak who's defining what the East was really.
[Guest]: Now when you put this whole thing together, Indus is a defining point. And on this side,
[Guest]: you had many systems that could co-exist. But when you bring in boundaries around it
[Guest]: and you bring in utilisation of a faith for the benefit, that's where Brahmanism starts
[Guest]: coming by. Now Brahmanism has been opposed in the Indian context by many faiths or many
[Guest]: belief systems. Buddha did that. Mahavir did that. Kabir did that. Any bhakt did that.
[Guest]: Nanak did that. So they were all opposing this ownership or that God can be only reached
[Guest]: through me, the concept of Brahmanism. So these Indic religions had a co-existence.
[Guest]: And what the Sindhu belt basically did was when the Turki people started coming in, if
[Guest]: you go to UP, you'll find where two cultures, the Hindi and the Islamic aspect, they use
[Guest]: two words, Saptah and Haftah. Saptah becomes Haftah because in the olden times, in the
[Guest]: Persian, Sa is pronounced as Ha. So Sindhu became Hindu. When the Turkic civilisations
[Guest]: came to the defining point of Sindhu, Sindhu became Hindu. On that side was a different
[Guest]: culture which they were coming to assimilate into. I don't use the word conquer. There's
[Guest]: nothing as conquering. Boundaries were not there. They were coming in to assimilate.
[Guest]: There were tugs of war happening in terms of faith, in terms of assimilations. Many
[Guest]: things happened in this thing. So they were assimilating here and they saw a different
[Guest]: culture and that's why the word Hindu came in. And I will just say one thing that I've
[Guest]: observed, you know, these are my own observations. When the earliest migrations of a lot of Punjabis
[Guest]: happened towards US, if you see the newspapers in the California belt, what they say, I'm
[Guest]: not, I'm not saying Sikhs are Hindus or Hindus are Sikhs or I'm not going to do all that
[Unknown]: discussion. I'm just telling you what I've observed. The papers say Hindus are coming
[Guest]: to America. Are they all Sikhs from Punjab coming in turban wearing Sikhs, right? What
[Guest]: I'm trying to say is that, yes, in the early days, the Hindu in the Indic belt was not
[Guest]: a defined religion as we are calling it today. Today, it's become a defined structure. You
[Guest]: got to take the word Hindu as coming from Sindhu river as people on the Indic side living
[Guest]: here. I think that's something very hard to digest today when you bring it in. A lot of
[Amit Varma]: people don't like it. And what strikes me is that on the one hand, there is a happenstance
[Amit Varma]: of colonialism and the British trying to keep the narratives which are convenient for them
[Amit Varma]: because it fits in with their whole tactical policy of divide and rule. So it works like
[Amit Varma]: that. But on the other hand, we also find this natural impetus within faiths themselves
[Amit Varma]: to sort of ossify in certain directions. For example, one, you've got the separation, this
[Amit Varma]: separation in people's minds of Sikhism from the other broader traditions that they were
[Amit Varma]: once considered to be part of. And on the other hand, you have, for example, the movement
[Amit Varma]: of Hinduism towards Brahmanism, which itself seems a political movement. And even within
[Amit Varma]: Sikhism, you know, the Khalsa strand of it taking prominence and therefore some of the
[Amit Varma]: other diversity with among Nanak's followers somehow kind of disappearing. Why do you think
[Amit Varma]: there is this tendency? Is it something inevitable? Is it going to happen to all intellectual
[Amit Varma]: traditions that you develop your own dogmas and customs and rituals and then they get
[Amit Varma]: ossified and then that defines a religion instead of being merely one expression of
[Guest]: it?
[Guest]: No, I think any faith goes towards defining of a boundary. That's a natural process that
[Guest]: happens, right? So there's no faith that's excused from it. But in the context of Nanak
[Guest]: and his believers, one needs to put a bit of a historical context to it. When he walked
[Guest]: the path along the Indus belt, so he travelled far and wide, but his major influence was
[Guest]: in the Indus belt because I have walked the Indus belt from Kashmir in Pakistan side,
[Guest]: right down till Sindh, Balochistan, through Pakistan's Punjab and Khyber. And we can talk
[Guest]: about my works later on, but I can confidently say probably in seven decades, I'm the first
[Guest]: one to have walked so deeply inside, definitely more than 180 cities and villages. And I've
[Guest]: seen strands of cultures that are still living there. I've been into Afghanistan, I've filmed
[Guest]: in Afghanistan and I've seen strands of surviving cultures. There are very few people left,
[Guest]: but there was a thriving culture that was there till 30 years back. The war has disrupted
[Guest]: everything and there are only about 850, what I call as the Nanak Panthis left there. The
[Guest]: only point I will try and make is the moment you move from the India or the Punjab of India
[Guest]: and move towards the Indus belt in Pakistan and go down to Sindh, Balochistan, and then
[Guest]: go into Afghanistan, the one thing that you find in the people still who are living there
[Guest]: is that Nanak is an integral part of the entire non-Islamic society, which is a very interesting
[Guest]: observation because when you look at it today, in the context of where the believers of Nanak
[Guest]: are in India, so there were two strands and 47 people came here and for whatever reasons,
[Guest]: the boundaries kind of got restricted. A lot of people still believe in Nanak, they go
[Guest]: to the Gurdwaras and all, everything. He's there in people's heart, but I don't think
[Guest]: people are really understanding his philosophy, right? So it's just become another idol or
[Guest]: another worship factor, but people aren't getting the depth of it. And then the Sikhs
[Guest]: have now become the only kind of perceived followers of Nanak. But when you go into the
[Guest]: Indus belt, you find Dada Rewa Chand, Bansri Lal, Santosh Kumar, Santokh Singh, Ram Singh,
[Guest]: all followers of Nanak. And then you go into Afghanistan, the boundary of distinction between
[Guest]: Hinduism, Sikhism, as we define in India, is not there. Now, when I look at that, so
[Guest]: then I ask myself, I've read about these things because when you read the Persian sources
[Guest]: after Nanak, before the emergence of Khalsa, I'm not trying to demean anything, Khalsa
[Guest]: emerged for a reason, there was a need for there, right? But till then, the Panth was
[Guest]: in the Persian sources known as Nanak Panthi. The Persians are writing about the Panth of
[Guest]: Nanak. Yes, in that Panth, there were many strands, many strands were there. Sutra Shahis,
[Guest]: the Udasins, the many other strands were there. And then came the Khalsa strand. There was
[Guest]: a reason for that. It saw its glorious chapters. But somehow, the factors in my understanding
[Guest]: which have caused disruptions are a culture that was existing along the Indus belt where
[Guest]: the faiths were amalgamating. And I see that in Sindh, there are Darbars, and then there
[Guest]: are Gurdwaras. And you see, you know, there's a lot of syncretic aspect coming in.
[Guest]: 1947 is a point of deflection. I would say, if you take the whole landmass, what you see
[Guest]: today as Punjab in India, is only about less than 5% of the entire landmass of the Indus
[Guest]: civilization where our forefathers came from. The Nanak's believers were right from Kashmir
[Guest]: down to Sindh, Balochistan. And that 95% of the land went away. And one fine day, you
[Guest]: were thrust into a new land, and you got disseminated into Maharashtra, into Tamil Nadu, into UP.
[Guest]: My father from Kashmir landed into UP. And I've seen my own family's people, you know,
[Guest]: the first obvious thing is you kind of, your generation becomes quiet because they've experienced
[Guest]: a holocaust, right? You become quiet. Second generation becomes confused because you were
[Guest]: quiet first. Second generation, the information is not passed on, you become confused. Third,
[Guest]: it's lost totally. And some of them, islands get up and they start probing these questions,
[Guest]: some of them. And I see myself as one of those islands. But when I look around, what I see
[Guest]: is that the dissemination of the people into a wider society resulted in a need for assimilation
[Guest]: and acceptance. It's natural phenomena, right? You look different, your faith is different.
[Guest]: Here's a different, there's civilizations along river belts. And the two major civilizations
[Guest]: in the North India was the Indus belt and the Gangetic belt. Gangetic belt had a Hinduism
[Guest]: which was more, the Indus belt from the times of Nanak, Baba Farid and others, had moved
[Guest]: towards more bhakti tradition. And that's where the caste system was being shunned.
[Guest]: The equality between men and women was being talked about. It was being talked about the
[Guest]: equality between faiths. Nanak was saying, na ko Hindu na musulman. It is very differently
[Guest]: inherently from the Gangetic belt. And then these people are thrust into this belt. Now
[Guest]: you are on the fringe as yet in terms of faith system, because only a few years had passed
[Guest]: by since Nanak and this uprooting happens. So as you land there, the generation starts
[Guest]: assimilating. I think that's what has caused a lot of moving away because people are confused.
[Guest]: People don't understand. We've not done the passing of the philosophical message. That's
[Amit Varma]: caused the distancing, I think. So, you know, I have a couple of follow up questions on
[Amit Varma]: this. But before we get to that, you know, I've heard you speak about an encounter you
[Amit Varma]: had with someone from the Udasin faith in Bihar, which you said moved you greatly and
[Amit Varma]: moved me as well when you told that story. So, you know, why don't you tell us?
[Guest]: Well, you see, there was there was many traditions that I said were in the strands in the Nanak
[Guest]: Panthi culture. And what's right or wrong, I will not get into because, you know, now
[Guest]: I'm getting into the realm of faith, you know, and people have opinions. So to the viewers,
[Guest]: I'll humbly request that don't pass judgments, because I'm only talking from what I've observed
[Guest]: in my works. We've not talked about my works as yet. But so I don't know if people have
[Guest]: the context of what I've generated. But for my works, when I really walked the paths,
[Guest]: and I observe a lot of things where it takes me and transports me back into time. And when
[Guest]: they were in the Sikh history, when the Sikhs were facing the persecution, right, the Khalsas
[Guest]: were facing a persecution in the Punjab after the weakening of the Mughal Empire in the
[Guest]: period wherein Nader Shah invades, Ahmed Shah Dali invades eight times. In that period,
[Guest]: it's a very, very dark period of Sikh history, because there was a reward for a Sikh's head
[Guest]: in the lands of Punjab. So the one who would swear to wear a turban and be distinctly visible
[Guest]: had a reward on his head. Sikhs were living in jungles that time, they were doing guerrilla
[Guest]: tactics, right. And in that period for the defence, the Sikh community cannot forget
[Guest]: that the broader Nanak Panthi culture, the non-Khalsas took care of their shrines, their
[Guest]: places. And I say it's not there in the Sikhs, it was ours. It was of the every strand that
[Guest]: was there in Punjab, they were believers of Nanak. It was our collective composite culture,
[Guest]: right. So the Udasi sect did do a lot of contribution. They managed the sites in the time when they
[Guest]: were not being persecuted because they didn't look like Khalsas, right. But the way history
[Guest]: moved on and with the definition of the boundaries of who a Sikh is in the modern context, which
[Guest]: happened about 100 years back, it's a different topic altogether. But when you define something,
[Guest]: right or wrong, I'm not going to get into that. But if you define something, you also
[Guest]: define what you are not, you know. So defining has a negative side to it also. You also define
[Guest]: who you are not. And when you start defining yourself in terms of black and white, you
[Guest]: also define who the others were not, right. I think that led to a bit of distancing. So
[Guest]: the over a period of time in 100 years, the Udasi culture moved away. And I was moved
[Guest]: because I did meet one of the, in my filming of the Allegory of Tapestry of Guru Nanak's
[Guest]: travels, I try and go into a lot of these strands of the past where the broader believers
[Guest]: of Nanak. To understand Nanak, you cannot understand him from Gurdwaras alone. There
[Guest]: is space for Gurdwaras. But Nanak was travelling to Sufi sites, Hindu sites, Islamic sites,
[Guest]: Jogis, where they were meeting. And therefore, you have to get into every place where he
[Guest]: had been. So when I go into those places, I meet lots of different kinds of people.
[Guest]: I make an effort to even go to Kanfatta Jogis, because he was having dialogues with the Siddhs.
[Guest]: So I have to now in 550 years later on in his lifetime, I have to also interact with
[Guest]: them. So when I interact with the Udasi order in Bihar, I mean, this person interestingly
[Guest]: made a very interesting statement. He said, unfortunately, the way things have gone, we
[Guest]: have been ousted from the faith. And he was hesitant to speak about Nanak. And I said,
[Guest]: you know what, you've got Nanak all over your Dera. Why won't you speak about it? And he
[Guest]: says, because we've been ousted. And then he said a very interesting statement. He says,
[Guest]: all right, you make a judgment that we do this XYZ. Look into your own self. Don't you drink?
[Guest]: Don't you do this? Don't you do that? And then you pass a judgment on us. And you've ousted us.
[Guest]: And he says, had you not ousted us, you know, what my vision as a youth was, when I was a 15
[Guest]: year old child, and I became an Udasi, all throughout my life, I was wanting to take
[Guest]: Nanak's philosophy into every temple of India, because it's the most important philosophy of
[Guest]: oneness. But then when I heard him, I said, yeah, I mean, this guy is saying right. So if I don't
[Guest]: have any religious objectives behind it, and no agenda, then just look at it objectively as to
[Guest]: what a person says, it makes you think. I'm no one to pass judgments on history, but it is what it
[Amit Varma]: is. And you know, it strikes me looking at Nanak as a layman, it seems that rather than think of
[Amit Varma]: him as the founder of a specific religion, which is distinct from all others, he seems to be more
[Amit Varma]: a figure like Kabir, that even if you're not a follower necessarily, like I'm an atheist,
[Amit Varma]: but reading Kabir always moves me. And I find Nanak to be a similar kind of figure. Is that
[Guest]: something you would agree with? Absolutely. All the Bhagats were the same. The thing is,
[Guest]: Nanak is absolutely, Kabir, Nanak, Jaidev, all of them are absolutely, Baba Farid, they're all
[Guest]: aligned. They're all profound Bhagats who were talking about oneness, trying to reform the
[Guest]: society. You find appeal in Kabir, I find it too also, right? But then I ask many a times,
[Guest]: you being a Punjabi origin, how deep have you gone into Nanak? And we're not trying to compare
[Guest]: two individuals, each to themselves. They're both powerful people, right? But how many times have
[Guest]: you gone to Nanak? Now, I know the answer would be much lesser, right? And I as a follower of
[Guest]: the Granth Sahib have delved into both. And I've always asked this question as to why would you,
[Guest]: who was also from the composite culture of Sindh belt, the Sindhu river belt, the Indus belt,
[Guest]: when your forefathers were actually revering the entire composite culture of the Granth Sahib,
[Guest]: where all these Bhagats were there, why would you not be reading Nanak so much? That makes me
[Guest]: then question is that have we created a boundary so hard around the practices that Nanak has become
[Guest]: inaccessible, his verses have become inaccessible? I think that's what has happened. Otherwise,
[Guest]: there's no reason why Nanak's verse should not be sung by any other person who sings Kabir's verse.
[Guest]: But rules, regulations and other things have made it hard now. Now, again, not trying to say what's
[Guest]: right or wrong because we're getting into the realm of religion, but purely from his verses and
[Guest]: his verses and his meaning, it's an unfortunate outcome that's happened. We can't blame anyone
[Amit Varma]: else but ourselves. Another sort of interesting thing that you were pointing out when we had,
[Amit Varma]: you know, coffee before this recording is how Sikh history has often been elided and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not given adequate attention on either side of the border after partition. Tell me a little bit
[Guest]: about, you know, sort of why that has happened. So your question about history, just a bit of a
[Guest]: background for the viewers, is that the work that I've done, my two foundation works, is first in
[Guest]: the book called Lost Heritage of Sikh Legacy in Pakistan. Second one is The Quest Continues Lost
[Guest]: Heritage of Sikh Legacy in Pakistan, in which I've mapped the remnants of the Sikh legacy across 126
[Guest]: cities and villages in Pakistan, across Baltistan, Kashmir, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab, Sindh and
[Guest]: Balochistan. Of course, I've been very passionate about documenting for posterity and that's why
[Guest]: I've taken so much of risk to walk so deep inside, probably as a first person of non-Pakistan origin
[Guest]: because my parents were from that area. I walked deep inside and I was able to get this documentation
[Guest]: done. But in the process, as I released my first book, I remember there was a history teacher,
[Guest]: history professor sitting in the Delhi release, a non-Sikh, and she actually made an interesting
[Guest]: point. And she said, Amarty, what you've just shared with us is absolutely right. And I,
[Guest]: as a history teacher, can validate this because in the Delhi University, we only make a passing
[Guest]: mention of the Sikh history, which is limited to Sikh gurus and a brief mention of Ranjit Singh
[Guest]: and that's it, brief. And you make me think as to why don't we delve deeper? And the answer to that
[Guest]: question of hers or the thought of hers was, I said, I have thought about this myself too. And I
[Guest]: feel that my community is a cucumber between the sandwich. And when I say my community, I'm talking
[Guest]: about the wider context, not just the Khalsa. Every Punjabi who got uprooted, every Sindhi who
[Guest]: believes in Nanak who got uprooted, cherished the valour. Every family of Punjab would have the
[Guest]: eldest son as a Sikh, right? They cherished it. That's why, right? They used to have them in the
[Guest]: past. So my answer to that was that we are a cucumber in the sandwich because I feel in India,
[Guest]: not that it's officially said, but I feel we don't teach the Sikh history because 80%
[Guest]: of the glorious chapters churned in the lands that became Pakistan in 1947. And that is not our land.
[Guest]: The great empire of Ranjit Singh and so on. 80% of the glorious chapters right up till Afghanistan
[Guest]: border, Jamrod Fort where Hari Singh Nalwa died. After 1000 years of invasions, he plugged
[Guest]: the further invasions through the Khyber Pass. No other invasion has happened thereafter. British
[Guest]: came from the other side, didn't come from Khyber Pass. But Hari Singh Nalwa is the deciding point.
[Guest]: He plugged it. But that history doesn't find any place in India because it's a history that
[Guest]: churned in the lands that became Pakistan, which is no more part of India. And when I walk in
[Guest]: Pakistan, the history books do not mention the Sikh history period. There's a silence around it.
[Guest]: And I've seen the Punjab University books in Lahore, university books, two volumes. They talk
[Guest]: about the demise of the Mughal empire, the coming of Nader Shah Ahmad Shah Abdali, and then comes
[Guest]: the advent of British. The entire period of the Sikh chapters is silent. And you look at that,
[Guest]: and you wonder why. And then I think it's because it's a period after 1000 invasion where the ruler
[Guest]: of the state was not a Muslim. Now, it was a very secular empire. Ranjit Singh was a very secular
[Guest]: person because more than 50% of his forces were Muslims. His foreign minister was a Muslim. So
[Guest]: many brave generals of the Muslim faith actually died defending his empire. And yet he doesn't
[Guest]: find a mention because he is not a believer of the Islamic faith. So it doesn't find mention
[Guest]: in Pakistan, it doesn't find a mention here. And that to me is the unfortunate thing that our
[Guest]: community, therefore, I feel very passionately that if we don't write and protect our history
[Guest]: in terms of visual remnants and other things, how will my next generation remember? How will we
[Guest]: revive those art, architecture, cultural footprints from these various strands that I see across in
[Guest]: the remnants in Pakistan? It's important to bring that perspective into these documentations so that
[Guest]: we don't lose those strands. And that's why I've been actually dedicating myself onto this path.
[Amit Varma]: And this also sort of reminded me of, you know, you've written about how Guru Arjan
[Amit Varma]: got Sam Iyam Mir of Lahore to lay the foundation of the Golden Temple at Amritsar. And how later
[Amit Varma]: when Guru Arjan was sort of imprisoned by Jehangir before he was eventually executed,
[Amit Varma]: Sam Iyam Mir and Vazir Khan got together to petition for his release, which kind of shows
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, there was so much sort of syncreticism in it and the differences between
[Amit Varma]: these religions and his people weren't as ossified and hard coded as it seemed to be today. And you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned earlier families where the tradition was that, Hindu families where the tradition was that
[Amit Varma]: the first child would be a Sikh. And I'm told my own family was one of those. So the practice stopped
[Amit Varma]: a generation ago, which is kind of fascinating. And all of this comes because of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that phrase that both of us have used, and I want you to talk about a bit more, which is
[Amit Varma]: Nanak Panthi. You know, you've pointed out, and we'll talk about your, you know, travels through
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan after this, but you've pointed out that people often have a misconception of how many
[Amit Varma]: Sikhs there are in Pakistan. The cookie cutter answer, as you've said, is 12 or 13,000 from the
[Amit Varma]: 1500 who were left after partition. But your answer is that if you don't define the followers
[Amit Varma]: of Nanak as Sikhs, and you look at what you call Nanak Panthis, there are many, many more than that.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's true. I mean, I'm often always asked this question. And I think Pakistan does not
[Guest]: understand this context of the Indus Belt. Sikhs themselves are ignorant of it now. So they tend
[Guest]: to see only the Khalsa count, people who are turban wearing like me, and I'm a proud adherent
[Guest]: of the Khalsa tradition. That's my culture. That's my background. But I'm no one to decide who else
[Guest]: is a believer of Nanak. So when I say the entire culture along the Indus Belt, all the Sindhis,
[Guest]: all the Balochis have been the believers of Nanak. I mean, I see them all in Pakistan still.
[Guest]: And what people don't know of is, you know, there are more than 250 Gurdwaras still operational in
[Guest]: Sindh and Balochistan, right? And so when you look at that, you say, you know, the entire culture
[Guest]: that's yet living there, and we are not recognizing them. So that entire belt is what we call as the
[Guest]: Nanak Panthis. My estimate is that there are over 800,000 Nanak Panthis still in Pakistan.
[Guest]: When I meet Dada Rewa Chand in Sukkur in Sindh, and he shows me the translation of the Granth
[Guest]: Sahib that he's done in Sindhi script, 24 volumes, although he's a small minority in Sindh of the
[Guest]: Nanak Panthi culture. But that shows me the passion with which he actually believes in Nanak, right?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you've written about how Hindus in Sindh call themselves Sehdari Sikhs.
[Guest]: Yeah. And Bansri Lal in Mingora, who manages the Gurdwara, by all definition of East Punjab,
[Guest]: he will not be considered a Sikh, but he is a very devout Sikh. So I think that poses a question as
[Guest]: to where our boundary today is and where it was. I consider myself very fortunate that having been
[Guest]: born and being conditioned with what's right, what's wrong, as I walk these paths in these
[Guest]: lands, I found the remnants, the strands of the intangible culture yet alive. That makes me say
[Amit Varma]: that, okay, this was the society. Is this what you mean by what you said earlier about losing
[Guest]: your faith and then regaining it? Yeah. I mean, you have to grow in a condition, environment,
[Guest]: and then you have to drop the barriers and the conditioning. It's like breaking the shell,
[Guest]: right? The egg shell, right? And you have to then now start re-looking at things. I am still
[Guest]: a proud Sikh. I am still a proud Khalsa. But the only thing I'm saying is the definition of what I
[Guest]: understand of the faith of the Indus belt was so beautiful, so broad, and Nanak was the entire
[Guest]: fabric of it. That needs to be re-looked in the India's context where the communities have got
[Guest]: disseminated. And people don't understand this. So I think for that, I consider myself fortunate
[Guest]: and thank the divine that you gave me this ability to walk the lands and interact and stay with
[Guest]: those people. I spend days and nights with them. And my heart pains when I look at how the culture
[Guest]: is now in small pockets. You know, when communities get in a holocaust, when they move out, the ones
[Guest]: who chose to stay, they become inwards. So they start protecting themselves more. But that's where
[Guest]: lies the beauty. Because when you parachute inside that society seven decades later, you find that
[Guest]: they protected a strand that is lost elsewhere, that's gone elsewhere else. So here you still
[Guest]: find it still protected because they become inwards now. They built a fort around themselves.
[Guest]: They don't want to lose that. And you managed to get inside that, you parachuted from nowhere,
[Guest]: and you suddenly see and say, ah, this is what my father used to talk about. This is what I used to
[Guest]: hear about. This is what I've read about. And I'm finding the living strands of that. And it was a
[Guest]: very, very progressive society. And I want to deviate a little bit into the remnants of the art
[Guest]: and try and understand the culture. So in The Ruins, in my second book, The Quest Continues,
[Guest]: I've shown a lot of pictures. I don't try and interpret a lot of stuff, you know, because I've
[Guest]: chosen not to do that. I want the viewer to interpret it themselves. I'm not trying to
[Guest]: handhold you and take you through. I'm just describing my journey. But I've given you so
[Guest]: much of visual material in there that if you are having the open mind to look at them and not
[Guest]: discard it because it goes beyond the domains of your conditioned mind, then you will find a lot of
[Guest]: answers in it. But you will have to find the answers. In my calls, in my talks, in my discussions
[Guest]: with people, I will, wherever there's an opportunity, give my thoughts, but I don't write
[Guest]: it everything. So I'll give you two things from art and talk about the culture itself.
[Guest]: So I find in one of the places of worship, a fresco of a woman leading a hunt. It's in the
[Guest]: second book. And she's leading a hunt and catching hold of a blackbuck deer.
[Guest]: And there's a man sitting on a horse behind, chilling it out with a hawk on his arm. So there
[Guest]: are two things that I take from it. One is blackbuck. Blackbuck, that means was there in Punjab
[Guest]: too. That's why you're hunting in Punjab. Today you don't have it because the environment has
[Guest]: changed in the 200, 300 years. The environment has changed from forests. A land of five rivers would
[Guest]: not be an agricultural land. They'll be heavily forested, right? If you read the Umdat-Uttarik,
[Guest]: the day-to-day account of Ranjit Singh's period, they're going into forests. That forest is totally
[Guest]: gone. It's an agricultural land. Punjab today is absolutely manicured, pedicured land, right?
[Guest]: But there were black bucks moving around. Ranjit Singh's troops have hunted lions and tigers there.
[Guest]: So they were there. One of the wildlife thing. I'm coming to more of a deeper meaning out here.
[Guest]: This fresco probably is 200 years old. 200, 250. I can't put a date to it. I'm just saying probably,
[Guest]: right? That means 250 years back, the society in the Indus belt was believing in women's
[Guest]: empowerment because she was leading a hunt. Man was chilling behind. Women's empowerment
[Guest]: in today's world is 250 years old. It's 250 years late, sorry. 250 years late. In Punjab,
[Guest]: our forefathers were much ahead. Today, we have regressed. Today, Punjab cannot claim to be the
[Guest]: place where there's women's empowerment. We have regressed. But my forefathers were much more
[Guest]: forward. That's what I take from that art. Otherwise, that art would not exist there.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one wonders if the art is an outlier. I mean, I did an episode with Madhvi Menon on the
[Amit Varma]: history of desire in India. And it's certainly true that there were many different kinds of
[Amit Varma]: expression given to desire. And women could be, you know, could have lived different lives there.
[Amit Varma]: But I am really not sure looking through history with the limited knowledge I have
[Guest]: that women were ever empowered. I would always kind of been.
[Guest]: And in the context of Punjab, I would not agree because empowerment starts from a philosophical
[Guest]: seed first. If philosophically you don't believe in empowerment,
[Guest]: an art as an expression cannot come out. So first, let's then step back. Nanak says in his writings,
[Guest]: why do you call her inferior? Who gives birth to the greatest of the kings?
[Guest]: Why do you call her inferior? Nanak is talking 500 years back about women's
[Amit Varma]: equality in the society. On the one hand, this sounds fairly enlightened. But on the other hand,
[Amit Varma]: one could also argue that this takes a paternalistic view of a woman in the sense
[Amit Varma]: saying that she is valuable because she gives birth to men.
[Guest]: Yeah. But at the same place, he's writing in other places also about the glory of the woman,
[Amit Varma]: right? She's, I mean, But through the male gaze,
[Amit Varma]: right? Through the male gaze, like in this example,
[Guest]: I think there are many other verses which are talking about her status in the society. Of
[Guest]: course, there's a maternal aspect, there's a nurturing aspect of the female species. And
[Guest]: today, I'm not trying to say women's empowerment today's context of that everyone needs to be in
[Guest]: the workforce and this and that. I'm not passing any judgment on that. But they were being put on
[Guest]: a pedestal with the natural instincts kept into them.
[Amit Varma]: And certainly relative to the times. Absolutely. So I think there is the art,
[Guest]: as I look at it, it had its some imprints into that. Of course, there's a lot of and I will not
[Guest]: the strategy is not perfect. But these are the glimpses that you get because there are
[Guest]: cracks in the society, right? There are always cracks. The second one I want to talk about is
[Guest]: very interesting fresco again, that you find frescoes inside some of these ruins of spiritual
[Guest]: sites of a gurdwara that I saw Shravan Kumar holding his parents in the two tokris on the
[Guest]: two baskets and walking. Now I look at that and say, wow, so Shravan Kumar is not about any religion.
[Guest]: It's not about any religion. It's about respect to your parents that transcends every religion.
[Guest]: It's a basic fundamental duty, right? And Shravan Kumar finds a space inside the artwork of a
[Guest]: gurdwara. And then I ask myself, will he find space in the artwork of a gurdwara today? Probably not
[Guest]: because he's not wearing a turban. That makes you think that, okay, here's a strand which I see in
[Guest]: the past of what the culture was, what the society was and where we are today. I'm not passing
[Guest]: judgment as to what has led to there, but it allows you to go back in time and then start
[Guest]: asking certain questions. That's what I'm doing again and again. I'm not writing everything in
[Guest]: my books, but I'm requesting the viewer to delve into the pictures and see for yourself.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, some of the pictures I found really fascinating in your book is in your chapter on
[Amit Varma]: the Baba Dhan Singh Gurdwara at Kot Fateh Khan, you've shown frescoes of Shiva, Nandi and Ganesh
[Amit Varma]: and then Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. And, you know, again, that was something I kind of had to spot.
[Amit Varma]: You don't have much commentary on that. You've just laid it out for, you know, people to see
[Amit Varma]: and sort of think for themselves. In another chapter, you show Nanihal Singh's Haveli where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there's a Rang Mahal on the roof and there you see Krishna listening to music and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. How did you train yourself to be able to look at these frescoes and sort of
[Amit Varma]: identify who the characters are or even other nuances like elsewhere you have, you know,
[Amit Varma]: identified a building and said the bricks that were used here were of a time of Ranjit Singh's
[Amit Varma]: time so we can date it accordingly. What was some of this knowledge part of the layers of
[Amit Varma]: knowledge you were building up before you embarked on this quest or was it during this quest that you
[Amit Varma]: kept refining your understanding? So, first and foremost thing, you're talking about Nanihal's
[Guest]: Haveli and you talk about Krishna and you talk about other things. Yes, you find a variety of
[Guest]: art form but I just want to point out there's one picture in there. Don't miss it. Go and look
[Guest]: by the picture again. There's also a Masjid in that. I missed it. Yeah. So, it's not, all I'm
[Guest]: trying to say it's not one view, right? So, in his bedroom, which is, I'm assuming it's his bedroom
[Guest]: because it's his living place, he's got arts of the entire culture, the composite culture of Punjab.
[Guest]: Even Masjid is there. So, let's not just see the present Hindu aspect of it. There are Sikh gurus
[Guest]: there, there is Masjid there. So, they are reflecting the culture of Punjab in their bedroom,
[Guest]: right? I think that's the key thing out here. As far as the identification of bricks and the other,
[Guest]: many other things, I think it's not, your question is not about the bricks itself but the many layers
[Guest]: that we're talking about. It's a process. It doesn't happen overnight. As I said, don't follow
[Guest]: your passion. Create your passion. When you create your passion, every moment is a question. Every
[Guest]: moment is a question. In my talk to you right now, I'm probing certain things inside my mind, right?
[Guest]: Yeah. Every moment becomes a question when you start creating your passion and therefore every
[Guest]: moment becomes a learning space. I am not born historian. I am not an historian. I'm an electronics
[Guest]: engineer who's done MBA, who's walked in the path of the finance industry. I was the revenue
[Guest]: management head for Asia Pacific. I'm not trained for these things, but I've forced myself to start
[Guest]: asking questions in those creating passion sub-segments of my life of four to five years
[Guest]: that I was doing very passionately. And when you start doing that, you don't know what question
[Guest]: will come to your mind. So I'm not trying to go into a classroom environment, but I'm curious enough
[Guest]: to look at things and try and find answers. Okay, so why is this brick thinner than the bricks that
[Guest]: I see today? In the thin bricks, I find certain bricks are bigger in size and certain are smaller
[Guest]: in size. They are thin. Now you're going to have to look at that. Why is this larger? Why is this
[Guest]: thin? What period are they coming from? Because bricks are made in kilns, right? And people buy
[Guest]: them and they make monuments. Monuments survive. Now you're going to look at the brick sizes to say
[Guest]: which period it belongs to. There is a certain size of bricks in the Punjab region, which is
[Guest]: known as Mughlai bricks, thin bricks, but broader. Then Ranjit Singh's period, the kilns, the casts
[Guest]: for the bricks changed to smaller size, but still thin. So you look at the two, you can say this is
[Unknown]: Mughlai period or Lodhi period, and this is the Ranjit Singh's period. And then you look at the
[Amit Varma]: British bricks, which become thick, what we use today. Much like the British themselves, as we now
[Guest]: know. So no comments on that, but yeah, so that's how you start, you know, probing. And the only
[Guest]: thing I can say is that knowledge is a process of layering. No one can claim to know anything
[Guest]: and everything. I don't know anything and everything, but the layering will allow me to
[Guest]: assimilate knowledge from the works done by the people in the past. And hopefully I'm adding my
[Guest]: layer for the future generation to take away something from it. Knowledge comes in layers,
[Guest]: and knowledge will keep assimilating in layers. The question is, is the seeker showing it's his
[Guest]: or her commitment to delve deeper into the layers of knowledge to understand what the person is
[Amit Varma]: after? Very profound words. And I would add to that and say podcasts also come in layers. We
[Amit Varma]: will now take a commercial break and come back after the break to add a layer of your personal
[Amit Varma]: journeys to Pakistan. If you're listening to the scene in the unseen, it means you like listening
[Amit Varma]: to audio and you're thirsty for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge you to check out
[Amit Varma]: Storytel, the sponsors of this episode. Storytel is an audio book platform that has a massive range
[Amit Varma]: of audio books from around the world. The international collection is stellar, but so is
[Amit Varma]: a local collection. They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audio books. What's more,
[Amit Varma]: I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I talk about one book
[Amit Varma]: every week, giving context, giving you a taste of it, and so on. Download that app and listen to my
[Amit Varma]: show. And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend
[Amit Varma]: an audio book that I liked on that platform every week. My recommendation for this week is Where
[Amit Varma]: India Goes by Diane Coffey and Dean Spears. This book takes a closer look at how Indians go to the
[Amit Varma]: toilet and has some startling insights about open defecation. Coffey and Spears argue that the
[Amit Varma]: practice of open defecation is not just a result of poverty, but a direct consequence of the caste
[Amit Varma]: system. Listen to the book for more or check out episode 82 of The Seen and The Unseen, where I
[Amit Varma]: discuss just this with Shruti Rajgopalan. We spoke about this book as well, so do listen to it on
[Amit Varma]: Storytel, Where India Goes by Diane Coffey and Dean Spears. Download the Storytel app or visit
[Amit Varma]: Storytel.com. Remember, that's Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com. Welcome back to The
[Amit Varma]: Seen and The Unseen. I'm chatting with Amardeep Singh about his fascinating work looking at Sikh
[Amit Varma]: legacy. Amardeep, let's kind of talk about your, you know, the first of your two projects, so to
[Amit Varma]: say, which was traveling through Pakistan, which resulted in these two books and these two
[Amit Varma]: documentaries. And you know, you start your book Lost Heritage by sort of injecting a personal
[Amit Varma]: note into it, where your father Sundar Singh in Gorakhpur receives a, you know, a postcard from
[Amit Varma]: Rawalpindi. Tell me a little bit about that. And was your sort of family history where there's a
[Amit Varma]: lot more history, which goes back to the trauma of partition? Was that part of what drove you on
[Guest]: your quest? Yes, it's there's a personal aspect to this whole quest, which has transformed from
[Guest]: a very personal probing to documenting for the broader communities. So it's a transformation
[Guest]: of a personal quest. I didn't go into Pakistan, to be honest, to write any book. It just happened.
[Guest]: Because when I left the corporate world, I just thought I'm actually in between something. And
[Guest]: the doors were shut for a little while. And I think Divine was trying to push me in this direction.
[Guest]: And when I decided to walk in, the gates started opening. So Divine was waiting for me to take
[Guest]: the step and then started opening the gates. But in that opening of the gates, I stepped in
[Guest]: with a simple quest as to my father was not able to go back to Muzaffarabad in Pakistan's Kashmir.
[Guest]: And my mother was from Abbottabad. Both of them could not go. So I wanted to and there are no
[Guest]: more. So I wanted to see if I can go in and see the places. And then the layers of my own building
[Guest]: on creating of passions that I was doing had prepared me over the time as a photographer,
[Guest]: as a small visual narrative writer, as having enough knowledge about history, about spirituality,
[Guest]: about not just my faith, many other faiths, all the layers were prepared. And when I stepped inside,
[Guest]: the gates started opening up for me. But I only went in with a personal quest. But what I saw
[Guest]: and I felt that I came back with 36 cities and villages in a span of 30 days, I said, wow, this
[Guest]: is a huge land that I've traversed in just 30 days. And should I just sit back or should I write
[Guest]: this for posterity? Because like me, which was a personal quest, you said your father was from
[Guest]: Sheikhupura. I'm sure you have a desire too. I'm sure there are many others who have a desire.
[Guest]: I'm sure there are many Muslims on the other side who have a desire to come to UP and Bihar.
[Guest]: It's a human aspect. It's a human need to kind of connect to your roots. And the hardened boundaries
[Guest]: don't allow us to do that today. So if a divine energy has blessed you, should you keep it back
[Guest]: to your own quest? Or should you open it up? I may not be able to take you into your personal journey,
[Guest]: but I can give you a glimpse of the journey that makes you curious enough and you don't know how
[Guest]: these things will develop. And I've often said in my talks is I am waiting for a day when a Hindu
[Guest]: will get up and say, I will document the Hindu legacy in Pakistan. A Jain will get up and say,
[Guest]: I will document Jain legacy in Pakistan. And I'm waiting for a day when a Muslim will get up in
[Guest]: Pakistan and say, I will document the Islamic legacy in East Punjab. The day we've done that,
[Guest]: in 10 volumes, we will have the Punjabi legacy. Until that time, I'm only one piece of the
[Guest]: equation. So you are planting seeds for the wider communities to now start exploring their roots.
[Guest]: And this is a natural formal path of putting layers of information where these things will
[Guest]: grow. And I thank myself that in the five years that I've seen, and I'm not the only
[Guest]: person who can take credit there. Many forces have come together, but I look at the picture
[Guest]: of the first book, the front cover picture of the broken Dera Chauha Baba Guru Nanak Gurdwara,
[Guest]: the historical Gurdwara. Between 2014, when I went there, and when we are sitting here last year,
[Guest]: it was announced that Gurdwara will be maintained like that. Many others have been decided to be
[Guest]: maintained. I don't take the credit for it, but I know in the quarters that I've dealt with,
[Guest]: the initial reaction was, why have you not shown Nankana Sahib in the front cover? But I said,
[Guest]: I have shown it inside. I've shown the things that are working well. I've shown where the
[Guest]: opportunities lie. And to me, these are opportunities. And my feeling is, it's my
[Guest]: heritage which is lost because another Amardeep may not be permitted. Another XYZ may not be
[Guest]: permitted. And therefore, it's lost from us. And I want us to think that there's a potential inside
[Guest]: this. And that potential is what can then transform and bring about change, right?
[Guest]: So I think the answer to your question is that we have to do the right thing. We can't control
[Guest]: every outcome. But if we do the right thing, I think it leads us to the right direction in terms
[Amit Varma]: of bringing about change. And it kind of seems to me that when you travel through Pakistan,
[Amit Varma]: you went simultaneously on three different kinds of journeys. One is an intellectual journey of
[Amit Varma]: trying to understand what happened and all the dissipations and to figure out what remains.
[Amit Varma]: One is sort of, in a sense, a spiritual journey of understanding Nanak's legacy and Nanak's message,
[Amit Varma]: so to say. And I'll ask you about both of those later. But you also went on an emotional journey
[Amit Varma]: where you're revisiting what is part of your past. For example, Muzaffarabad, you know, you point out
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, the postcard that your father in Gorakhpur received was from a long lost nephew
[Amit Varma]: who had been separated from your aunt in Muzaffarabad when, you know, the two kids, 10 and
[Amit Varma]: 8, were separated from their mother. And then they landed up on the other side. You also talk about
[Amit Varma]: your aunt, Inder Kaur, throwing her infant girl off the bridge in Muzaffarabad. And she died,
[Amit Varma]: of course. And you actually went to that bridge. You actually saw the place where all these corpses
[Amit Varma]: of your community and some of your family had actually lain there. What are sort of your
[Amit Varma]: feelings when you're visiting not just foreign towns, but also parts of your own past?
[Guest]: It's an interesting question you ask, right? Basically, you're asking what's my emotional
[Guest]: state, right? In other words,
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, and does it evolve? Like, are you then able to like, these quests are happening
[Amit Varma]: simultaneously. At one level, there is an intellectual understanding, like you write
[Amit Varma]: about how you have decided at an intellectual level that you're not going to pass judgment
[Amit Varma]: on characters in history. You're just going to document what happened and what there is.
[Guest]: But at another level, you are deeply affected. So I think let's start with the second piece.
[Guest]: Am I deeply affected? It's a question I ask myself, right? I'm going to give you an answer,
[Guest]: which is going to be absolutely 180 degrees on the other end of the spectrum of what you're
[Guest]: thinking or what everyone thinks. The reality is when you go on this quest, I never went to
[Guest]: write the first book. You've got to understand that. I never went to write the second book.
[Guest]: I never went to make the two documentaries. The only time I've consciously went, the two
[Guest]: documentaries on Sikh legacy in Pakistan, the only time I've consciously went in search of
[Guest]: something knowingly that it may not be possible because the task was too huge is the making of
[Guest]: Allegory and Tapestry of Guru Nanak's Travels, right? That's the only thing that has happened
[Guest]: in the last one year. But before that, for four years, I've done everything unknowingly.
[Guest]: So I've gone inside because the energy opens up. I go inside and I start probing. I have the history
[Guest]: in mind. I have the other stuff in mind. But when I go to the place, the curious mind of mine does
[Guest]: not have the bandwidth for any emotions because I'm wearing 10 antennas on my head at that point
[Guest]: of time. I'm wearing the antenna of that emotional handshake and the coming together of people and
[Guest]: the welcoming aspect, you know, that's the human aspect. People welcome you and other things,
[Guest]: right? That's one thing you have to manage. Secondly, you're going to manage the, there are
[Guest]: questions and there are doubts as to this man has come inside. Why has he come so deep inside? There
[Guest]: are agencies that will be questioning you and there'll be other people questioning the people
[Guest]: who have doubts on you. Why have you come here? You've got to manage that aspect because that can
[Guest]: become a barrier in your quest, right? You've got to manage your time because there's a cost
[Guest]: associated with that time, right? And you've got to move fast. And you are doing 36 cities and
[Guest]: villages in 30 days. You've got to move fast. You go into a monument, there's a whole village that
[Guest]: gathers there. In that village, you don't want to be there for long because they are seeing a Sikh
[Guest]: for the first time after seven decades, right? I'm visible a Sikh, right? So you've got to get in and
[Guest]: get out fast. And then you've got to look at the frescoes, the ruins, the remnants, absorb all
[Guest]: that aspect. There's a lot happening in a short span of time. In that whole scheme of thing,
[Guest]: in the moment, there's no scope for emotion. You can't sit and ponder by the bank.
[Guest]: No, there's no time. This is where people think that you're on a holiday. No, you're on a holiday.
[Guest]: 36 cities and villages in 30 days. You're going from one end of the country to the other end of
[Guest]: the country. You're getting up at 3 a.m. and you're on the road, coming back at 11 o'clock,
[Guest]: backing up the data. It's a huge, humongous task. There is no scope for emotion. And I'm glad there's
[Guest]: no scope for emotion because the day there's emotion in the fieldwork, your fieldwork is
[Guest]: biased. Fieldwork has to be always emotionless. Then you start looking at the layers when you
[Guest]: come back. Does the emotion come later? Yes. When you come back and you start looking at,
[Guest]: and you lie down on your bed and you start looking at the ceiling above and say,
[Guest]: what happened just now? Something happened, right? And you say, my God, this was like a
[Guest]: journey of a lifetime, right? And then you say, oh, I saw this aspect. And you start interpreting
[Guest]: it. And then you start writing down. I never went to write a book. Then you start writing down.
[Guest]: That's where the emotion starts coming. But it's a very task-oriented writing because you're trying
[Guest]: to do the whole thing. What takes five to six years in a PhD environment, you're doing in just
[Guest]: seven to eight months. You're doing very fast. You're just purging all the information down
[Guest]: from your mind into the paper, right? The emotion starts coming out really in this whole process is
[Guest]: when you start presenting to the audience and you see the audience is now connecting. And that's
[Guest]: where your inner state is saying, I'm glad we did this. That's where the emotion starts coming out.
[Guest]: When the audience emotes, then you also have an emotional aspect coming out, right? So that's
[Guest]: the reality of the whole thing. And I'm glad it is the way it is because fieldwork should never
[Guest]: be influenced by emotion. And when you do that, then you have the ability of seeing different
[Guest]: strands coming out. A lot of people say to me that these works are going beyond the Sikh domain.
[Guest]: And I say, you know what? You've not understood it. You've not understood the culture of the past.
[Guest]: And these strands are the only strands that you have. You can't throw the baby in the bathtub
[Guest]: out. You've got to keep the strand the way it is. Right or wrong, let's not pass judgments
[Guest]: because my forefathers have made it. Our forefathers were collectively living, they have
[Amit Varma]: made it. Let's try and understand from it and figure out what is it. I'm going to play a brief
[Amit Varma]: clip. And of course, I'll play the audio, but I saw it on video in the second of your documentaries.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of moved me a bit where a gentleman named Aslam at Toha Khalsa talks about a massacre
[Amit Varma]: that happened there just before partition, where a massacre of Sikhs, where a lot of women gave
[Amit Varma]: their lives by jumping into a well. And you were actually at that well. And this gentleman was at
[Amit Varma]: that well with you. And he told you what he saw. And when I saw it, of course, I found it very
[Amit Varma]: affecting. So I'm going to briefly play that audio clip and then translate.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So here's the translation of what Aslam says. He's asked where he was standing. And he
[Amit Varma]: says, quote, right at that spot. Many women were standing outside while some had jumped in the well.
[Amit Varma]: There was no space left in the well as it was filled with bodies till the top. The ones yet
[Amit Varma]: alive in the well were trying to immerse their head in the water. They wanted to die. Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And all this again, you know, when you read about it, when you go there, you've written also about
[Amit Varma]: the rape of Rawalpindi, for example, all the violence that happened. And again, for all of
[Amit Varma]: this, you're saying that you process it later. When you are there, you're just in the moment,
[Guest]: you have to get the data and you have to get out. Absolutely. Because it's a very complex
[Guest]: thing in the limited time frame that you're there to access data. If you can get the data,
[Guest]: then you understand after that. But you see, this work cannot be done if the divine is not
[Guest]: going to help you in this whole process. You only have the desire. Now, the desire gets me into
[Guest]: Tuha Khalsa village, which itself is in a restricted area. You can't get inside Tuha Khalsa very easily.
[Guest]: I've reached the village. How do I find that well? This generation that saw it is nearing its end,
[Guest]: right? There may not be anyone alive. So how do you stumble upon some man who then takes you to
[Guest]: his home and his mother, who's 92 years old, Muzammil Bibi, meets you and she says how great
[Guest]: Tuha was before 47. It was a big town and she talks about a Hindu and seek her friends. And
[Guest]: she's remembering the girls with whom she used to play. But she was probably at that time,
[Guest]: 92 years, 22 years old. She's 92 years now. So she was 22 years old at that time.
[Guest]: And then from there, as you're walking out, you're trying to find the well. She's too old. She says,
[Guest]: oh well, it happened. That well is there. But how do you go there? Where is it? People don't
[Guest]: understand it. The new generation has not bothered about it. And you come out and you suddenly see
[Guest]: an old man walking with his stick on the road. And I stopped the vehicle and I went to him and
[Guest]: I said, Baba Salaam. And he looks at me from his broken glasses, you know, he looks at me and he
[Guest]: says, how did you come here? Because he's seeing a visible Sikh, right? And I tell him and then I
[Guest]: asked him, do you know, do you know the well where the women jumped in 47? He says, I was present
[Guest]: there. How do you describe that? You will bump into someone who is an eyewitness random in a
[Guest]: short span of just a short visit to that village. And that person then takes you there. These are
[Guest]: divine blessings. So your understanding of the narrative is being propelled by a divine push.
[Guest]: And then when you're there, when I saw the well, I didn't have a tear coming down of my eyes.
[Guest]: It's contrary to what people would believe. I did not. Because for me, that moment is what I was
[Guest]: trying to capture. What is it? And I know I will be able to lie down on the bed later on and reflect
[Guest]: about it. In the moment, there was no emotion. But these emotions are being propelled by a force
[Guest]: that's guiding you towards something. And that to me is a divine intervention. And I think the
[Guest]: universe is waiting for, as I say, again, what we started off with, creating your passions. I think
[Guest]: the universe is waiting for the commitment from you, the commitment from you over a period of 30
[Guest]: years to say, now you're ready. Now I'm going to open the gates for you. And now wherever you will
[Guest]: walk, whatever be your desire, it will be manifesting in front of you. And that's where
[Amit Varma]: it all starts happening. So you mentioned that when you decided to go to Pakistan,
[Amit Varma]: and I think you went in October 2014, you landed up the first time, the first time,
[Amit Varma]: and you didn't intend to write a book, you didn't intend to make documentaries,
[Guest]: what pushed you? Why were you going there? So I was, as I said, in the interim of my in the
[Guest]: midway of moving out, I moved out from Amex, and I was supposed to go to Australia, I decided not to
[Guest]: go, I was going to look for another job. And finding a job when you exit at a senior level
[Guest]: takes a bit of time. And six months had passed by, I was going through the process. And I decided,
[Guest]: now's the time, I should go to Pakistan. And I landed there. How I got my visa is a different
[Guest]: story. I mean, how do I'm an Indian born, but I hold a Singaporean passport. In those days,
[Guest]: still the question was, you're an Indian born, both the countries do the same thing to the people.
[Guest]: If you are, so I have a friend who's Pakistani born, and he had a wedding to come to in Delhi,
[Guest]: the wedding got over. And from four months after that, the visa got approved, right? So this is
[Guest]: a problem for both the nations, right? So I apply for it, and I get it. And the next time I land in
[Guest]: there, and then why did I meet that first person who held my hand? Six months prior to my going
[Guest]: there, I had seen someone doing something similar, which was of my passion, some Pakistani. And I
[Guest]: saw him and I asked him, why don't you click better pictures? He says, I don't have a camera.
[Guest]: I just packed my camera and sent it to him, because I'm a photographer, I had many camera
[Guest]: bodies. I just packed two lenses and one camera and sent it to him. The point is, why did it
[Guest]: happen six months before? Because that person was already ready with that. Because I had done
[Guest]: something for me, for him, without him asking. And when I landed there, he was there to hold my hand.
[Guest]: And one thing led to the other, to the other, to the other, and you did the whole journey.
[Guest]: So you didn't go to write a book. But when you came back, that's when you started thinking,
[Guest]: I went on a personal quest. I have seen Muzaffarabad. I had only two reasons. One is I
[Guest]: want to see strands of my history. Are they still there? In the remnants, tangible and intangibles?
[Guest]: Were they still there?
[Guest]: Those are the monuments through which the lost heritage, the Sikh legacy.
[Amit Varma]: That's a Sikh history. What strands of your history there? Did you feel that personal
[Guest]: connection?
[Guest]: So my history is my community's history, my Punjabi history, the Islamic history,
[Unknown]: the Hindu history, the Jain history, the...
[Guest]: The Nanak Panti history.
[Guest]: Everything is my history. The lands are my history. I'm choosing to see it from a Sikh
[Guest]: lens. But in that Sikh lens, you will find a lot of plurality actually intertwines, right?
[Guest]: When you're talking earlier about the artwork inside Nonyal's Haveli and a Masjid and Krishna
[Guest]: both exist there. It's our collective legacy, right? So I went to see that. And then when I
[Guest]: was able to go into Multan and see the Anglo-Sikh, second Anglo-Sikh war monument there
[Guest]: and find out that the Idgah where the second Anglo-Sikh war started because of Van Zagnew
[Guest]: was beheaded there. It's not there. But the place around which where the Idgah was there,
[Guest]: you see it, right?
[Guest]: So you find these remnants and you start stitching the story together. When you come back,
[Guest]: you feel propelled and compelled that it must be written because it's no more your quest. It
[Guest]: becomes a responsibility for the bigger communities and the wider communities and the inspiration
[Guest]: that you can provide to them. That's how the first book happened. And I did it fast. I just did it
[Guest]: because I was in a rush to get back into the corporate world. I never knew that this would
[Guest]: become my life. I did it. And I didn't know that after I got it published, I faced a lot of
[Guest]: problems in publishing in the first book because I'm an unknown author. I'm coming from finance
[Guest]: industry, trying to do a huge volume book. Publishers are there to make money out of it.
[Guest]: They're looking at the commercial aspect, faced a lot of problems, but we managed to get it done.
[Guest]: A lot of people came forward and saw my work and they helped me and thanked all of them.
[Guest]: Once we got it published, I didn't realize that the world was waiting to hear the story.
[Guest]: And then it just kept me on the road for a good 10 months. And I spoke at some 70-odd seminars
[Guest]: around the world. And it didn't allow me to come back to Singapore for a good eight months. People
[Guest]: kept moving me from one place to the other. So, eight months I was on the road. It's when I came
[Guest]: back and then I started applying for the job, not two and a half years had passed by. And I was dead
[Unknown]: meat for corporate industry. Because two and a half years is too late now, right? You've been far
[Guest]: out and living in a senior role. And that's when I started reinventing myself. I said,
[Guest]: no, I've got to restart this whole thing. So, I picked up a job in a startup. Something that I
[Guest]: was doing at an intellectual level, what I was probably doing 20 years back in my career. My
[Guest]: mind was not into it. And then the divine opened this gate again, because I used to dream of Jamrod.
[Guest]: I used to dream of Jamrod at the Khyber Pass. I was looking at the Khyber Pass. I was standing
[Amit Varma]: at Jamrod. I was advised not to go to Jamrod in my first book. And Jamrod, of course, for the
[Amit Varma]: listeners, is a great fort at the Khyber Pass where Hari Singh Nalwa actually died, in fact.
[Guest]: Yes. And it's the fort that finally plugged. It was a fort. It was made in just a few days
[Guest]: and finally plugged the invasions from the Central Asia into the subcontinent.
[Guest]: Because thereafter, the British came after the Sikh Empire. They came from the East. They didn't
[Guest]: come from the West. No one has actually come from the West afterwards. So, that's a defining point
[Guest]: of the history. And I was standing there. I couldn't go inside because I was advised not to
[Guest]: go inside Jamrod. I was at Peshawar in the night before. This is 2014. The army school attack on
[Guest]: the children happened at that time. Taliban, this thing was in the peak. There are some Sikh
[Guest]: shopkeepers from Peshawar who have shops close to Jamrod. And I would ask them, can you take me in
[Guest]: the morning? No one was wanting to take me. They didn't want to take risk. Because I look different,
[Guest]: I talk different, I hold a camera body, and I could be a sitting duck, right? I could be easily
[Guest]: abducted, right? No one wanted to take me. And I got up in the morning. I just got into a car,
[Guest]: went there. But I couldn't go inside because that fort is with the army. And I clicked a picture
[Guest]: from the outside and I came back. But between the first book and when the energy of the second book
[Guest]: developed, as I was giving the talks around the world, I used to get dreams of Jamrod. I used to
[Guest]: feel that I was so near and yet so far. I just stood across the road and I clicked a picture. I
[Guest]: couldn't go inside. And you know when you feel something very strongly and passionately, the
[Guest]: universe again answers. And I was in this job. I was doing it for three months. My mind was not
[Guest]: into it. And one day I get a call from the embassy of Pakistan in Singapore. And Mr. Nasrullah Khan
[Guest]: calls me. He says, come and meet us. I went there. He says, you know what? You did this first book.
[Guest]: You went around the world. You called us to inaugurate the book in Singapore. I did call
[Guest]: them, right? I must say that you've taken a very tricky subject and you've taken it around the
[Guest]: world and you're not politicizing it. I said, there's nothing to politicize in it. I can't
[Guest]: change the history. But what can I learn from it? And what can we all learn from it? And what can we
[Guest]: motivate each other is the objective out here. And if you can actually openly talk about it,
[Guest]: then we will all be in a better space. He says, no, I do hear you because you went around the
[Guest]: world and we have got reports from all over that you've gone. Because I'm a Singaporean,
[Guest]: so of course the reports would come on it because I'm talking about a subject of Pakistan.
[Guest]: And so I'm quite impressed that you've had no political tension anywhere in your talks, right?
[Guest]: So he says, we have selected you from our embassy on a academy of letters. It's like
[Guest]: a Sahitya Kala Academy Awards. They have an academy of collectors. They want to bring in
[Guest]: some foreign nationals to expose the artists in Islamabad to some foreign talent. So they said,
[Guest]: from Singapore, we selected you. Would you be able to go there? I said, absolutely.
[Guest]: So I went in, I took that invitation. I took a leave from my job for five days.
[Guest]: And Jan, 2016, I was in Pakistan. No, Jan, 2017, I was in Pakistan for five days. And then the
[Guest]: energy that developed again when I was there, I should still get the gleam of Jamrod. And I met
[Guest]: some people who had heard me and they were in influential quarters. And then I requested to
[Guest]: them that I'm here. Please open the Jamrod Fort for me. Next, I know the fort opened. Next,
[Guest]: I asked for Attaq. Next, I asked for Shabkadar. Everything started opening. I couldn't describe
[Guest]: this. I could feel that the energy is now in my favor again. And I asked myself this question,
[Guest]: do I walk away right now for that job, which I don't enjoy? I just picked up the phone and
[Guest]: called them that I'm resigning. I was there for five days. I came out of the country after 55
[Guest]: days. And in that process, I went after the force that I was shown to me. I just went on my own,
[Guest]: just went deeper and deeper. 90 cities and villages. I came back and I just couldn't hold
[Guest]: myself back. I said, this is, again, something that needs to be shared with the world because
[Guest]: now I've documented a huge amount of data about the culture, the intangible aspects in Balochistan,
[Guest]: living communities, the hidden treasures inside this of the Sikh era forts and other things.
[Guest]: I just couldn't sit back. I just started writing immediately. No looking back. And it took me one
[Guest]: year, got it out. That was the second book, The Quest Continues, Lost Heritage of Sikh Legacy in
[Guest]: Pakistan. So that came out. And then I again, the moment the book came out, I was now this time
[Guest]: again, like the first book catapulted into these public engagements that took place in Pakistan.
[Guest]: It took me to over a hundred seminars around the world in just about eight months. So the demand
[Guest]: was there. People just kept moving me. I just kept talking. And it's really in 2018, September,
[Guest]: that I came back. I didn't know what to do because this space that I'm in, creative space, which a
[Guest]: lot of creative people go through, it's what I remember. I recall Shiv Kumar Batalvi, who's a
[Guest]: Punjabi poet, talks about this concept in a poetry about birha. Virha, as we call it in Punjabi,
[Guest]: say birha. And virha is that intense pain of separation from your purpose. I mean, virha,
[Guest]: actually in esoteric language, is talked about intense pain of separation from the divine.
[Guest]: But for me, the divine was my work. And when that intense pain of separation is there,
[Guest]: because the purpose is lost, the pain becomes very, very intense. And this pain is what drives
[Guest]: the creative process. Every time I've seen in this creative, in that corporate treadmill,
[Guest]: I used to just go straight. Here, it's a sine curve. You go, you create something and go inside
[Guest]: a valley. And that pain becomes so large that you then catapult again and takes you even to a higher
[Guest]: pinnacle. How long can you do it? I don't know. But the pain, the deeper it is, the more you'll
[Guest]: catapult. And I went into a painful process again after my second book. And the catapulting of that
[Guest]: was basically, I was aware of the first phase, after my first book, that it was a painful
[Guest]: experience. And I was trying to keep myself busy. And in the making of the second book,
[Guest]: I had some video footage, thanks to Salman Alam Khan, who was deputed by the establishment to
[Guest]: follow me into some of the forts, just for the forts. And he told me that, Amardeep Sahib,
[Guest]: aap kuch bol diya karein, aap creative vande hain, you're a creative person, I'm a creative person,
[Guest]: aap bol diya karein, my job is not to do a documentary on you, I'm just following you,
[Guest]: right? But you know what, the data can be used somewhere. And the data fell on my lap. It was
[Guest]: again a divine intervention, divine gift on my lap. But I had not acted on that data for one and
[Guest]: a half years. And I came back after my second book, I started looking at the data just to keep
[Guest]: my mind busy. And I saw a story emerging from it. And I took the music, I took my own feelings,
[Guest]: and I stitched it together. A novice trying to make a documentary, I learned it. And I all
[Guest]: stitched it together on my own. And we created two documentaries, which became Peering Soul,
[Guest]: which takes the viewer in a 50-minute journey to non-traditional sites of spiritual sites
[Guest]: abandoned across Pakistan. This documentary is not yet fully released on YouTube. I am
[Guest]: going to probably release it in the third quarter of this year. But we have released the second
[Guest]: documentary, which is Peering Warrior. That's a 35-minute documentary, which takes the viewer
[Guest]: across the forts of the Sikhera, where our history had churned right up to the Afghanistan border.
[Guest]: And some of the footage has never been seen before. So that documentary is there on the
[Amit Varma]: YouTube. If you search for Peering Warrior, you'll find it. It'll be linked from the show notes as
[Guest]: indeed the books will be as well. Peering Warrior documentary got completed and Peering
[Guest]: Soul. So Peering Warrior is there. And thereafter this two documentaries getting completed, my mind
[Guest]: now was again empty, right? And I'm saying what to do. And that's where very quickly this thought
[Guest]: manifested because I was already mentally prepared because I knew the narrative of Nanak. And I said
[Guest]: to myself this question, the skill set that I've developed is good to be aware of. What
[Guest]: corporate has taught me is it's good to be knowing your strengths and your skills. No point going
[Guest]: around and beating around the bush, life is too short, right? The skill that I developed in the
[Guest]: last five years was going into hard to access zones and making things happen to build a narrative.
[Guest]: That's the skill set at the basic level. So I asked myself, this was January 2019,
[Guest]: we started this project. I asked myself this question, Guru Nanak travelled far and wide,
[Guest]: 70% of his region is today in conflict zones. He's travelled far and wide across India, Pakistan,
[Guest]: Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Saudi, Tibet, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. If you look at the broad canvas,
[Guest]: 70% of the zone is not accessible today. Pakistan you can go to Nankana Sahib, Panja Sahib,
[Guest]: Kartarpur Sahib, three traditional Gurudwaras. But Nanak's narrative is not about the three
[Guest]: Gurudwaras. Nanak's narrative is about him going to Bahauddin Zakaria Shrine, him going to Hingol
[Guest]: Raj Mandir on his way to Mecca and all those aspects we need to bring in. So I started saying,
[Guest]: you know what, if my skill set is to get inside these hard to access zones, can I go once again
[Guest]: and bring together this narrative? And that's how this whole thing started, that I catapulted
[Guest]: myself last year in January into a journey that today we are performing. It's been now good 16
[Guest]: months on the road. And it's in the making of Allegria Tapestry Guru Nanak's travels. And I'll
[Amit Varma]: stop there. And maybe we can talk more about it later. Yeah, I want to come back to that later.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I find that whole project incredibly fascinating. But I have a few more questions about
[Amit Varma]: your travels through Pakistan. And one of them is this, that a lot of your photographs and by the
[Amit Varma]: way, your photography is absolutely excellent. I mean, it's hard for me to believe that you're
[Amit Varma]: a self-taught or an amateur or whatever, because this is beautiful. And a lot of them are of
[Amit Varma]: buildings and architecture and details of those. And it struck me that a lot of these are buildings
[Amit Varma]: and architecture that you have first read about. And, you know, and then you see them with your
[Amit Varma]: own eyes. For example, you've, you know, quoted Baron Carl Hugel's description of the Wazirabad
[Amit Varma]: Palace, and then you're actually there and you're seeing it with your own eyes. And in some cases,
[Amit Varma]: they're very dilapidated. They're in ruins. In some cases, they are being maintained and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and in some places they don't even sort of exist. How is your sort of reaction to that?
[Amit Varma]: Are you reorienting your picture of Sikh Pakistan all the time as you travel through it, you know?
[Guest]: First of all, let's correct this. I don't think I had read more than 15% of the monuments.
[Guest]: So, I had read about, maybe it's a 15 to 20%. So, of course, I've read about the Attock Fort,
[Guest]: but I've not seen the Attock Fort. I don't know what Attock Fort looks like, right?
[Guest]: I know about Jamrud, but I can only imagine what Jamrud is. I've never seen it.
[Guest]: Right? Okay. I've read about some of the Gurdwaras, Lahore Fort, some of the Gurdwaras,
[Guest]: historical Gurdwaras, period. And I know about what my intangible culture that my parents used
[Guest]: to talk about, or what we have seen the strands from my youth days and where we are today.
[Guest]: I'm aware of these things, but that's all it is. As you get into the country, you are not going
[Guest]: with something that you know. You're going with an open crucible, with an empty crucible.
[Guest]: It's a crucible of passion. And then the divine starts filling it up. In that moment,
[Guest]: you start observing it. Then when you come back and then you start looking at research
[Guest]: around it here and there, how do I fill it up? And therefore, in some of the places,
[Guest]: I can't tell you what the monument is about. I can't because I'm not a historian. I don't have
[Guest]: the facts. I don't have any published sources that are talking about it. So, I'm making the
[Guest]: most of telling you what I'm observing, because that can become a layer of history in time to
[Guest]: come. Wherever there's history available, I've quoted it, right? So, that's how one goes through
[Amit Varma]: it. And how do you warn against a tendency to try and romanticize what you're seeing? Like,
[Amit Varma]: to just kind of put that in perspective, I traveled through Pakistan when I was covering
[Amit Varma]: the cricket tour of 2006. And in fact, I, you know, went to the Gurdwara in Peshawar as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while I was traveling, one tendency I noticed in myself and therefore tried to watch against
[Amit Varma]: was the tendency to exoticize everything, to see significance in everything. You know, while for
[Amit Varma]: the people there, they are just the everyday, they are the everyday and the mundane. And there are,
[Amit Varma]: of course, two sides to this. One is that an outsider brings with him eyes that look past
[Amit Varma]: the normalization. So, you can find interesting things which the locals might take for mundane,
[Amit Varma]: but actually is not. But the other side of it is that you try too hard to imbue meaning into
[Amit Varma]: everything that you see. And the locals are like, you know, who is this guy who's parachuted down,
[Amit Varma]: and he's finding this interesting and that interesting with these all our lives.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you thought about your own process of looking and how others viewed this?
[Guest]: So, it's an interesting thing, you know, in my documentary, Peering Soul, I have inserted one
[Guest]: song, which is very much a feeling of my own state. When I'm at a Jambor village,
[Guest]: and it's Abhita Parveen's Sufi song, it says,
[Guest]: You made me a passionate person, you infuse passion in me, and I became passionate.
[Guest]: Now, in this world of conscious people, so-called conscious inverted, don't make me a piece of
[Guest]: tamasha is a play or a spectacle. Yeah, don't make me that. Now, that's a very profound feeling I
[Guest]: had. Because then I would go into the places, people would crowd around me, it would cause a
[Guest]: sense of disturbance. And then there are places where the intelligence would be after me, places
[Guest]: where people would not open the gates, the places where people would embrace you, right? Potpourri
[Guest]: of emotions. But I'm making that statement in that Jambor village, because as I climb up on the
[Guest]: Gurdwara building, which is broken, I request a person on the other side of the building of the
[Guest]: Gurdwara to allow me to enter from his home and take a picture. First, he was absolutely closed.
[Guest]: And to get inside a Muslim's home in that village with a purdah system, suddenly he agreed, and I
[Guest]: was inside. And I clicked a picture. At the same time, there were two, three people who were
[Guest]: shouting, get out, get out. But at the same time, the entire village had crowded around there and
[Guest]: looking at me walking on top. And I looked down and I said, I'm a source of play for them, right?
[Guest]: Source of tamasha for them. What I'm trying to get at is that in this whole play of things, you go
[Guest]: through a potpourri of challenges. And therefore, it's hard for you to kind of keep yourself focused
[Guest]: on what you're trying to do. And I've said this earlier, the idea is to just get as much
[Guest]: information and get out of that place. So it's hard for me to say that, you know,
[Guest]: the exact things that I would have done if I was a researcher, if I had free access,
[Guest]: maybe I would have put a staircase, I would have climbed up, I would have looked at each
[Guest]: artwork interpreted so differently, I would have spent maybe 10 days in a site.
[Guest]: But that luxury does not exist. So there are going to be a lot of critiques about my work.
[Guest]: And I say, you know what, critique it as much as you want to. The fact is, the situation does not
[Guest]: permit you to do that. Today, the situation might change because you've suddenly opened up the
[Guest]: Pandora's box about seeing the potential that exists there. And that needs to be seen in the
[Guest]: context of what you're doing as a leader into this domain. So what you were saying about is when
[Guest]: you're getting inside, when you went in, you had this whole host of people looking at you and other
[Guest]: things. And how do you keep yourself aligned to your objective? It's hard, very, very hard,
[Guest]: very hard. And therefore, you have to be very focused as to why are you here.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, also, I think what eyes you're looking at your surroundings through,
[Amit Varma]: like if you bring eyes that are desperate to find meaning that are a collection of your biases and
[Amit Varma]: your feelings and your, you know, impressions, then that will influence whatever you're seeing.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something where you thought that, okay, I you know, you already described that you weren't
[Amit Varma]: emotional during the, you know, during the process. So was your thing during the process
[Amit Varma]: of let me document everything now, I will process it later.
[Guest]: You got to keep in mind, I didn't go to write the first book, I didn't go to write the second book,
[Guest]: I didn't go to make the documentaries. I was simply observing a mere observer.
[Amit Varma]: But you were taking all these beautiful photographs.
[Guest]: I was, I was trained as a photographer out of my quest for five years,
[Guest]: when I was writing for magazines, I'm, I'm capturing the moment for myself,
[Guest]: not to write a book is when I came back, I felt compelled to write it.
[Guest]: But that moment, I'm just clicking it, maximizing, just getting out of that place.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know what I'm going to do with it. I had no idea.
[Amit Varma]: Would your journey have been different if you had gone there for the purpose of writing?
[Guest]: That's what I'm saying. So I don't know how different it would have been,
[Guest]: but I know it would have been much slower. And would it have been as successful? Maybe not.
[Guest]: Because when you go in as a researcher, your mindset is, I'm going to now study this monument,
[Guest]: I want to look at 10 things. And I'm not a researcher from that context. I'm trying to
[Guest]: document, I'm just trying to feel things, right, and get out, right. And I have made
[Guest]: something compelling out of that. If I was going there as a researcher, let's say I was on a grant
[Guest]: or let's say going through a university, I would be on a very different frame of mind. In 30 days,
[Guest]: instead of 36 cities and villages, probably I would have done four. A book would have gone so
[Guest]: deep inside a subject. But this is about a bandwidth, which is horizontal.
[Amit Varma]: This is breadth more than depth. And you're building a layer for others.
[Guest]: I'm building a layer. There's a lot of depth if you really want to see it in terms of
[Guest]: Pakistan and Sikh legacy perspective. There's a lot of depth in it, but it's still at a wider
[Guest]: horizontal space, right? You can pick up Nanak Panthis. I've devoted 110 pages.
[Guest]: Pick up Nanak Panthis and I always say, I'm in touch with some Pakistanis and I tell them,
[Guest]: they're quite inspired with the talks that I've done in last Islamabad Literature Festival and
[Guest]: Karachi Literature Festival. Some academicians, they are saying that we want to study the Nanak
[Guest]: Panthis culture in Sindh and Balochistan. I said, by all means, do it because I will not
[Guest]: succeed in doing it. But I've planted the seed in you. I've given you 110 pages.
[Guest]: Now you get inside it and you start creating the wells inside it to take you deep inside.
[Guest]: But if you don't create this landscape, which has been absent for seven decades,
[Guest]: you can't hope that someone's going to drill a well. So I think that's where it is.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, now, courtesy you, I'm going to play another audio clip. And this comes from your trip
[Amit Varma]: to Lahore, where you met these Muslim descendants of Bhai Mardana. Bhai Mardana, of course, was
[Amit Varma]: Nanak's companion through his travels. So you meet Muslim descendants of his who are in Lahore
[Amit Varma]: and who've carried on a tradition of doing Shabad Kirtan, even though it's no longer the profession
[Amit Varma]: as it was for their forefathers. It's no longer what they do. They are laborers elsewhere and
[Amit Varma]: they're working at construction sites and all that. But they've kind of kept the passion alive.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll briefly play this audio clip. And for those of you who listen to this podcast as higher
[Unknown]: speeds, as indeed I do, just for listening to this, please lower it to normal and then play.
[Amit Varma]: So that was quite moving. And you also sort of I mean, I have two questions. One question is
[Amit Varma]: that there are these group of people who are Muslims, even though they're descendants of Bhai
[Amit Varma]: Mardana, and yet they're singing Shabad Kirtan and they don't get paid for it anymore, as their
[Amit Varma]: forefathers might have. Why are they doing it? Why do these traditions stay alive? What drives them?
[Guest]: Who you are is your DNA. It cannot be taken away by just one holocaust. You may try and erase that,
[Guest]: but deeply you are that, right? The more you'll try and erase it, the more the inside will revolt,
[Guest]: at least for some few people. Now, Bhai Mardana was the companion, a Muslim companion of Guru
[Guest]: Nanak, who held the Rabab and walked with him in nine countries. And whenever Guru Nanak wanted
[Guest]: to sing, Mardana would pick up the Rabab and play with him. They were best of friends.
[Guest]: They were best of friends. 550 years back, Guru Nanak was born. So, do we think that 550 years
[Guest]: later, there'll be only one family of the descendants of Mardana? Obviously not. There'll
[Guest]: be many, right? But yet, I can only talk about one right now, right? Or maybe two. What I'm trying to
[Guest]: say is that the vast number of people have assimilated into many other things, but this
[Amit Varma]: island of one or two people. They're outliers. So, I'm a bias in a sense. You met them because
[Guest]: they're outliers. They're outliers and they're holding on because they are, for some reason,
[Guest]: having that seed planted in their roots, in their DNA, right? That's what is holding them,
[Guest]: but the majority have moved away. So, I've often asked this question that I've, now we're getting
[Guest]: into the realm of the making of Aligriya Tapestry of Guru Nanak's Travels, which has been a project
[Guest]: that we've been working on for the last 16 months. And I was in Pakistan from February to April, May
[Guest]: last year. And in my earlier trips I've gone, I've always met this family of descendants of
[Guest]: Bhai Mardana. And I've also had an opportunity of meeting many more people. But what I'm going
[Guest]: to get at is the fundamental question that I've asked myself in the making of Aligriya Tapestry
[Guest]: of Guru Nanak's Travels, which is a multi-episode documentary on his travels across nine nations.
[Guest]: I've asked, the entire community moved away of Nanak Panthis from the lands of Indus.
[Guest]: And yet, is Baba Nanak alive in those lands? Because Baba Nanak as a physical
[Guest]: body, of course, is no more there. But his thoughts, are they still alive? It's a question
[Guest]: that you pose yourself. And then I've had this chance to meet many such people. And before I
[Guest]: get down to the Bhai Mardanas, I want to talk about, I have had the opportunity, which people
[Guest]: will find very interesting, to sit in congregations every Friday evening, where the Granth Sahib's
[Guest]: one verse is picked up. And people from the age of 16, boys, young boy and girl from the age of 16
[Guest]: to the ripened age of 80, discuss one Shabad. Where is this? In Lahore. And they're all Muslims.
[Guest]: And they're all Muslims. Baba Nanak is yet alive, I firmly believe, in islands, but he's alive.
[Guest]: People who have love for him, they may be doing it in closed doors. And I've had opportunities to
[Guest]: go there, sit down. I could not videograph them, because for all valid reasons, I could have
[Guest]: been respectful. They didn't want to. But when I look at that, I say, oh, he is still here.
[Guest]: This is beyond faith. This is about Punjabis, beyond faith, Muslims getting together and
[Guest]: discussing Baba Nanak's Shabads every Friday evening. And then you look at the descendants
[Guest]: of Bhai Mardana. Bhai Lalji is Jatha. And I remember in 2014, when I went to Lahore first
[Guest]: time as a Dehradar Sahib Gurdwara, I met the Babaji there, who had come for 10 minutes of Kirtan.
[Guest]: There was no one sitting there, no audience, and he was doing the Kirtan. And I asked him,
[Guest]: and I said, I'm deeply touched that, you know, you've kept the tradition alive,
[Guest]: but I want to go to their home. And they were very warm. And they said, yes, we would love you to
[Guest]: take you home. But we apologise, we can't take you home. Because since partition, our forefathers
[Guest]: used to do Kirtan in the Golden Temple Darbar Sahib and Goindwal Sahib in Punjab. The partition
[Guest]: was so brutal that, you know, we got thrust on this side and the patrons who would hear us all
[Unknown]: moved on the other side. Basically, Sikhs and Hindus all moved on the other side. So we landed
[Guest]: in this place, there was no one to hear. And we are living in poverty, we do daily labour, and we
[Guest]: just make our ends meet. And there is no Sikh who has come to our home till date. And we are afraid
[Guest]: that if you will come with your turban, people will, our neighbours will pass judgments. I left
[Guest]: it. I didn't go back. But every time I would go, I would call them up and we would meet outside.
[Guest]: But you know, in last year, in February 2019, I was there for Guru Nanak's tapestry, Guru Nanak
[Guest]: Starvels making. And I asked the Baba again, I said, Baba, take me to your home now, we are here for Guru Nanak Starvels.
[Guest]: And then he had seen me for four, five years. He said, okay, come, let's go. So he took us to his
[Guest]: home. And on his roof, we sat and we recorded him and his entire family. Which is a recording,
[Guest]: I just played a while back. Yes. And the beauty of the whole thing is so everyone had crowded on top
[Guest]: and they were looking at them playing from the roofs in Lahore. And we got a drone picture of
[Unknown]: them, everyone looking at them, right. So the beauty is that after we left, a week later, the Baba
[Guest]: calls me up. He says, son, an amazing thing happened. I said, what? He said, no one said
[Guest]: anything to us. No one complained. Yeah. I said, why should they? Did we do anything wrong?
[Guest]: We were there as a message of love. You were there to shower love. We were talking about
[Guest]: positivities, right. He said, no, you don't know. So I said, no, I respect. But he says,
[Guest]: but the amazing thing is no one has said anything. What happened is that the veil of fear dropped
[Guest]: that day. And after that, I would find that, you know, last year was the 550th birth anniversary
[Guest]: of Guru Nanak. A lot of people were coming in. And he would proudly send a picture of every second
[Unknown]: person coming to his home. He says, oh, the following has come, the following has come,
[Guest]: following has come. And I would smile and say, we have just broken the barriers, right. So I think
[Guest]: that's the thing that I want to give as a message that when we talk, then we become closer. The
[Guest]: Radcliffe line has divided us so badly that a composite culture has got cracked. So basically,
[Guest]: I think that's the strand. And, you know, then there are many I've met who are also
[Guest]: yet learning Kirtan. They do it in their own quarters. They're Muslims. They're learning
[Guest]: Kirtan. The beauty of Punjab was that there are pockets who would respect the Vedanta,
[Guest]: respect the Granth Sahib aspect. And there were also many Hindus and Sikhs who would also,
[Guest]: vice versa, respect the Islamic and Sufi saints. And embrace multiple identities of their
[Guest]: traditions. So there's a beautiful book. If you go a little bit down from Punjab and into enter
[Guest]: into Sindh now, there's a beautiful book by, I forget his second name, but it's Ramse. If you
[Guest]: search for Ramse, and the title is Hindu Muslim Sikh question mark, right? It could be the other
[Guest]: way around also. It could be Hindu Sikh Muslim. I don't know. I'll link it from the show notes.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's Hindu Muslim Sikh. It's got a question mark. The question mark in that study is about
[Guest]: this Gora, this English man who's studying this community of the Nanak Panthis. And he's questioning
[Guest]: who are they? Are they Hindus? Are they Muslims? Are they Sikhs? Because for them,
[Guest]: Ya Allah, Hey Ram, Vaheguru, all come in at the moment when they have to say something.
[Guest]: They're all a part of the culture. So this was the people of Indus belt.
[Amit Varma]: Another sort of moving piece of music, which I'm going to play now again, is from a singer named
[Amit Varma]: Salima Khwaja from Lahore. And the backstory of this is that she learned music from a singer
[Amit Varma]: called Ghulam Chand. And Ghulam Chand was the sole carrier of a musical legacy that he nurtured all
[Amit Varma]: alone for many, many years, till Salima Khwaja came to learn from him in Lahore. And now she
[Guest]: carries it forward. Tell me a little bit about what that was. So there were many descendants of
[Guest]: Bhai Mardana. And we just talked about one family. And then there was another one,
[Guest]: Bhai Ghulam Chand, who passed away about, I think, six years back. And he used to do Kirtan at the
[Guest]: Gurdwara in the Goindwal Sahib in East Punjab. And he also got thrust because of the unfortunate
[Guest]: partition on this side. But I don't see him actually actively performing in places. I've
[Guest]: not seen much of his recordings actually performing. So he was more of doing it for
[Guest]: himself. What he was doing for a living, I don't know. But when I stumbled upon him,
[Guest]: he was very aged. And he was basically doing, there were some people who had found him and
[Guest]: they were recording him sitting at his home and some private gatherings here and there.
[Guest]: There are some people who were quite fascinated by his style of singing. So this is Rababi style,
[Guest]: you know, the Mardana's family style and singing Gurbani, singing Kabir, singing Nanak,
[Guest]: and so on and so forth. So some of the locals in Pakistan started going to him to learn.
[Guest]: One of them was Salima. She went to him for learning Kirtan at 15 years of age.
[Guest]: Not 15 years of age, sorry. She went to learn with him about 15 years back.
[Guest]: And today, the Baba is no longer there. He's passed away. But Salima has learned that tradition
[Guest]: and taken it forward. So to me, this is Bhai Mardana's DNA, which did not pass through the
[Guest]: blood lineage, has found another place to be seated in. It lives on in the culture. Yeah,
[Guest]: and it's found in the lady. It's crossing genders now. So Guru Nanak's quest continues from two
[Guest]: males traveling to now in Pakistan, a female now traveling with Baba Nanak in the form of Mardana.
[Amit Varma]: So I think he's still alive. Let's listen to this piece of music. Once again, if you're listening
[Unknown]: at a higher speed, just bring it to normal for this. This will be the last such interruption.
[Amit Varma]: That was beautiful. So tell me, Amardeep, you know, one of the things I noticed when I traveled
[Amit Varma]: briefly in 2006, so obviously I was essentially just a tourist, is how warm the people were,
[Amit Varma]: by and large. On your travels where you actually traveled much deeper and you were going from
[Amit Varma]: village to village, town to town almost, how did the people treat you and how did they treat your
[Guest]: quest? Let's try and answer this at a stratospheric level first. I think everywhere, and we've traveled
[Guest]: far and wide in different countries. I think first and foremost, the principle is as you think,
[Guest]: so you attract. So I think before we ask how people treated you, I think we need to ask how
[Guest]: you treated the people. Because if you treated them well enough, they will respond the same way.
[Guest]: People want to live together. People want to hug each other. People want to be closer to each
[Guest]: other. People want to understand each other's stories. The pain is not mine. The pain is theirs
[Guest]: too. The pain is yours too. We are all collectively impacted with it. And if you can understand that
[Guest]: from a humane perspective, why will people not connect with you? I think that's the principle
[Guest]: that we need to first understand. If you're going into research work like this, you're going to go
[Guest]: deep inside. You're going to go deep inside where others are not going. If you go to Lahore,
[Guest]: oh, a Sikh coming into the turban, or you coming in from India, of course, you know,
[Guest]: that's like more like a hullaballah, you know, just Mela kind of a thing. Now you're going deep
[Guest]: inside villages. That's where the true element will come out, right? By and large, people want
[Guest]: to embrace each other. Beyond faith, beyond religion, as humans, we want to associate with
[Guest]: each other. Our conditioning might have to be dropped because we might have certain conditioning,
[Guest]: this is not right, it's wrong, but all that will drop as you start gaining confidence. So people
[Guest]: are good by nature, but it's all about how you think. But having said that, I think the job is
[Guest]: not easy. Because people want to live together, but the sovereign nations and the politics of it
[Guest]: and what we've created, and for all fair reasons, the fear factors. Sort of narratives we feed our
[Guest]: people. Yeah. And that comes from a political aspect, right? There are people who get paid
[Guest]: to do their jobs of keeping a watch on you and other things. Maybe that person who's keeping a
[Guest]: watch on me, when I sit down for a cup of tea, he will drop his guard and he'll become the same
[Guest]: person, but he's doing a job. You've got to understand that he's doing a job. And that's
[Guest]: in both sides of the border. They have a job to do. So that's one aspect. That's where the problems
[Guest]: start coming in. But deep down, they're also human beings. Having said that, when you start peeling
[Guest]: the layers and start going down, most of the experiences of people going to Pakistan in our
[Guest]: domain is in Punjab. And you also said you've been to Lahore, maximum Peshawar, it's just a bit off,
[Guest]: right? But you will find in, let's say in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, there's a cultural sensitivity that
[Guest]: comes in. Punjabi by nature are more welcoming, you know, Punjab will be, you know, you feel at
[Guest]: home. But when you go to Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the cultural aspect starts coming in. The barriers,
[Guest]: not that people are, people are very nice, but the barrier is there to break that.
[Guest]: They're speaking Pashto instead of Urdu to begin with.
[Guest]: Even if you start, let's say there are people who speak in Urdu, even if you're speaking in Urdu,
[Guest]: it takes a little bit more effort to break the barrier. People are nice, but it'll take a little
[Guest]: bit. And then the cultural sensitivity, you just can't barge into anyone's home and stuff like
[Guest]: that. So that becomes a bit of a barrier. I think Kashmir is a bit of an interesting space because
[Guest]: Kashmir hasn't been in turmoil state for long enough. So Kashmir, I break it down into two
[Guest]: kinds of people. One is Baltistan, where I've had a lot of chance to go. Baltistan, the Balti people,
[Guest]: very nice people, very nice. It's not impacted by the Kashmir issue of the partition, you know.
[Guest]: I mean, the claiming of territories might be there, but people are not impacted by the crossfires
[Guest]: and other things. Very nice people. It's the Kashmir where my forefathers were from,
[Guest]: Muzaffarabad, which is right on the LOC, just next to it, right? Now there is a swapping of
[Guest]: population. There is bad blood that has flown in for long enough. There is doubt, there is suspicion.
[Guest]: So I've not had major interactions then. I can't say any negative interaction, but neither have I
[Guest]: had any memorable, positive interaction to talk about. And then you go into Sindh. It becomes
[Guest]: very interesting that in Sindh, as I said, Hindu, Muslims, Sikh, question mark, Ramsay's work. These
[Guest]: are people, whether they are Muslims or they're Hindus or whatever they are, they are the Nanak
[Guest]: Panthis. They're all composite. Very interesting breed of people, the Sindhis are. Very interesting,
[Guest]: least understood, very interesting people. But now from the Northern and Central Sindh,
[Guest]: now you come down to a place called Karachi where the population swap happened in 1947.
[Guest]: Who is the inhabitant of Karachi? It's people from UP and Bihar who came inside and that's where the
[Guest]: politics of the nation started. So they came in there. Now, let's not forget when partition
[Guest]: happened, the cleansing happened on both the sides. The UP-Bihar people who came to Karachi
[Guest]: in the period of July, August, September, their story is not about what happened to Punjab.
[Guest]: Where did it start from? It starts from, we moved towards our homeland in Karachi and from Punjab,
[Guest]: in the East Punjab, they faced massacres too because there was massacres happening in West
[Guest]: Punjab. It was a tit for tat. So their impressions that have come down through the generation is that
[Guest]: we faced this onslaught on us when we were passing through Punjab. But that memory is ingrained
[Guest]: somewhere is my experience. When I talk to people, they're nice, they're all great, but there's a
[Guest]: memory which is there. It's a conditioned memory. No one has a historical understanding of
[Guest]: what led to the partition of Punjab. Where did it start from? What's the root cause? Because they
[Guest]: were coming from UP-Bihar, which is far away. Their narrative starts, I got, my father or my
[Guest]: grandfather experienced this in East Punjab. The narrative starts from there. So there's a
[Amit Varma]: mistrust deep down, potentially could be there. And I guess the first time they meet you,
[Amit Varma]: they're not looking at you as an individual per se, but there's all this baggage of that past,
[Guest]: which is sort of there. So that's how I would define it. So there's a stratospheric level.
[Guest]: And then by and large, whichever place they may be from, it's how you think that's what you'll
[Guest]: attract. I think that's the principle. But then these are layers inside it. And that's what I
[Guest]: just want to expand on. And the same layers in India also. Each state will have a different layer,
[Guest]: different thinking. UP-Bihar is different than Punjab and South India and everything.
[Guest]: It's the same thing. But by and large in India, why would someone not live and embrace a person
[Guest]: without, irrespective of his religion or faith, right? Same thing. And you have another really
[Amit Varma]: nice story about how you went to the Daftu Gurdwara and this gentleman came to you and said,
[Amit Varma]: listen, I'm too poor to give you a gift, but I really want to give you something. So here's a
[Unknown]: pouch of opium. Did you take it? So certain things are kept secret, right? I have taken opium. I have
[Unknown]: taken even higher drugs than opium. I'm on synthetic drug because these passions are driven
[Unknown]: by druggy state. I'm just joking. But these are even a higher dose of opium, right? I'm on a drug
[Unknown]: state to do this work where you're risking your life. The high of the work. Yeah. It's like,
[Unknown]: I don't need an opium, which grows inside the poppy. My opium is something else, right?
[Guest]: So just coming to that, there are two very interesting things happened in Daftu.
[Guest]: It's an abandoned Gurdwara. Not abandoned, people are living inside it. What happened,
[Guest]: unfortunately, in partition is that you've got to put the landscape correct. You know,
[Guest]: both the sides suffered. Islamic legacy got wiped out of East Punjab. Hindu and Sikh legacy got
[Guest]: wiped out. Jain legacy, no one talks about it. Entire Thakpur Kar is filled with Jain site.
[Guest]: I always say to Pakistan, if you really want to develop your potential,
[Guest]: also look at not just the Hindu and Sikh aspects. Don't look at Katas Raj and Kartarpur only.
[Guest]: Look at the huge amount of Jain temples, which are lying abandoned. It's a huge legacy that
[Guest]: needs to be also brought on the forefront. But you need to understand who these are,
[Guest]: because you've forgotten, not understood them, right? So when partition happened,
[Guest]: and people came from East Punjab, there was a humanitarian crisis. You needed a roof on their
[Guest]: heads. You needed food. People were on their own. They went whatever they got. Gurdwaras typically
[Guest]: are congregational, and they have huge space. Temples typically are small plinth areas.
[Guest]: So they could not host people inside, right? Abandoned structures. A lot of people moved
[Guest]: inside Gurdwaras and made them their homes, especially in remote areas.
[Guest]: Daftu is one such Gurdwara. It's a fortress-like Gurdwara made from thin bricks, which dates back
[Guest]: to, which points towards Ranjit Singh's period. Beautiful structure, beautiful fresco works,
[Guest]: but it's in a bad state now. So I went in there. First and foremost, this huge gathering of the
[Guest]: villagers came by, right? And someone asked me at the entrance, Sardar Sahib, what is written on top?
[Guest]: And it was Guru Nanak's verse of Japji, God is one, right? Truth. He's truth, right? He's the
[Guest]: creator and so on and so forth. So I basically then was standing there and described to the
[Guest]: person. I said, this is saying that Allah is one. Yeah. I have to talk in their language.
[Guest]: And then I went inside and this man who's staying inside the Gurdwara, he comes to me and
[Guest]: is a very emotional. One of those few moments when I was really emotionally touched. He tells me
[Guest]: in Punjabi, he says, he holds, folds his hand, he says, I apologize. Say it in the original Punjabi
[Guest]: if you want to. Yeah. So he says, Sardar Sahib, maafi mangde hain. Saade kol uthe sirf do
[Guest]: waqt di roti seegi. Ish Punjab, from where he came. Saade kol uthe sirf do waqt di roti seegi.
[Guest]: Gadar vich asi ithe aage, in partition we came here. Gadar vich asi ithe aage, pinda pinda firde
[Guest]: rahe, te daftu aa poche. Gurdwara khaadi seega, asi andar badge. Asi taan to ithe rahe hain.
[Guest]: Maafi mangde hain, taadi imarat nahi sambhal sake. He's saying, in the Holocaust, we came from
[Guest]: East Punjab. We went through different villages and finally we came to Daftu. And we took place
[Guest]: inside shelter inside this Gurdwara. And I really apologize that I could not maintain your Gurdwara.
[Guest]: Because asi uthe ek waqt di roti kamande se, athe aaj bhi ek waqt di roti kama rahe hain. We were
[Guest]: only earning one bread there and one bread we earn here. We are still poor, but we could not
[Guest]: maintain it. That tells you the humane aspect of this entire crisis. He feels it, right? That
[Guest]: someone has come. And then as I'm coming out and I'm leaving, there's a person comes in, again
[Unknown]: another old man, right? Whom I'm talking about. He comes in and he holds my hand before I'm leaving.
[Guest]: He says, Sardar sahib, mere naal aao. He says, Sardar ji, come with me. I walk with him on the side.
[Guest]: I thought he's going to talk about something. And he opens his, from his shirt, he opens a small
[Guest]: knot. And he says, sade kul den waste kuch nahi hain. Thodi ji afeem hai laelo tusi. You know, I have
[Unknown]: nothing to give you. The little opium lying here, please take it. And I started laughing, right?
[Amit Varma]: I was touched by that moment. It was beautiful. It was beautiful. Let's talk about your current
[Amit Varma]: project now, retracing the steps of Guru Nanak and his travels. First of all, how do you determine
[Amit Varma]: where Guru Nanak went? Because he didn't write about it himself. Yeah, it's a good question. So
[Guest]: you are embarking on a massive project in 550 years after his life, right? And we are trying to
[Guest]: retrace his footsteps through visual documentation. I'm very clear in my mind. I am a human,
[Guest]: I will make mistakes. But I don't want to create new history. Because I know the beautiful,
[Guest]: pristine philosophy of Guru Nanak, which is beyond the tangibles. His first profound verse itself
[Guest]: talks about the vastness of his philosophy, stands reduced and limited today to tangibles,
[Guest]: to miracles, to tangibles. All these humans who had powers can do miracles, but that's not
[Guest]: what their philosophy is about. They are beyond miracles. They, being humans, are transforming
[Guest]: lives is a miracle by itself. They're teaching someone about how to live is a miracle by itself.
[Guest]: And yet today, we have reduced him to in this place, he took out water from the well,
[Guest]: and that place he implanted some impression and this and that. It's all magic and everything.
[Guest]: His ability to implant an impression in your heart and dig into the wells of your heart
[Guest]: is forgotten. So there's a big problem on how you're going to present Guru Nanak first at an
[Guest]: allegoric level. This is allegory, a tapestry of Guru Nanak's travels. A tapestry of Guru Nanak's
[Guest]: travels is easy to understand. It's like the fabric, the warp and the weft of his travels.
[Guest]: We can actually link it up. And we'll come to that, how you're going to determine that. But
[Guest]: the bigger thing is allegory. Allegory is actually a revelation of a hidden meaning.
[Guest]: Nanak today is not understood. I'm not a preacher. I'm not a theologian. But I have a probing in
[Guest]: this entire journey that I want to understand Nanak, who he is through these places. Why was
[Guest]: he traveling? What was he communicating? And that allegoric meaning has to be revealed.
[Guest]: That he has written. The beauty of Nanak is, unlike Babar, who writes his Babar Nama,
[Guest]: or unlike Jahangir, who writes Tuzak-e-Jahangiri,
[Guest]: or unlike Ranjit Singh, who commissions to write Umdat-u-Tariq, Nanak only compiles
[Guest]: spiritual verses that tell us how to lead a life, the psychology of a life, the inner being.
[Guest]: And that becomes later on a part of the Granth Sahib. He writes nothing about himself. Nothing.
[Guest]: And yet you then want to make a documentary on his travels. So where are you going to start from?
[Guest]: Because if your objective is not to create another new version of Nanak's travel, because
[Guest]: I sometimes jokingly say that Nanak in today's day is traveling further and further. Even in
[Guest]: 550 years after his life, every second day in the web university, or in the WhatsApp university,
[Guest]: or in Facebook, he's reaching newer and newer places. So I think Nanak needs to be left alone.
[Guest]: We need to understand his philosophy. But yet we are attempting to map out his travels. How are
[Guest]: we going to do it? You have to then look at what's the documented sources. Now documented sources
[Guest]: are written by men of faith. And if he has not written it, these are not primary sources.
[Guest]: Or someone living in his time has not written it, these are not primary sources. The first text
[Guest]: that appears is by Bhai Gurdas, who writes during the times of the Sikh gurus, but some 50 years
[Guest]: after his life. But he writes, Guru Nanak and Mardana traveled far and wide. And they went on
[Guest]: Udasis. Far and wide, but he specifically mentions four places, but he does not say that's what is
[Guest]: limited to. He travels far and wide, he's acknowledging, but he says he went to Sumer,
[Guest]: which is Kailash. He went to Baghdad. He went to Makkah. He went to Batala, where the Shivites and
[Guest]: the Sidhs used to sit. And then he says he traveled far and wide, not big enough to make a narrative
[Guest]: out of it. So then you move forward in timeline and you come across the first text that the men
[Guest]: of faith have written, which is known as Janam Sakis. Like the Buddhist Jatakas are there. So
[Guest]: like that, the Janam Sakis are written by men of faith, but seven to 10 decades after his life.
[Guest]: You can't throw the baby in the bathtub because that's the only source available to you. You have
[Guest]: to accept it. There may be human errors inside it, but that's the only source you have, documented
[Guest]: source. So you take this composite literature written seven to 10 decades after his lifetime,
[Guest]: and we draw a line there. We said we will make an assimilation of this and take out the journey
[Guest]: that he did out of this. Later on, texts continue to make him travel further and further and further.
[Guest]: We've drawn a line at the hundred years. That's it. So we are mapping that and as per that,
[Guest]: he's traveled to nine countries. Today, in fact, in the 550th year celebration of Guru Nanak's
[Guest]: travels, there was a book that was released by Indian High Commission in Kathmandu.
[Guest]: And it's about the Sikh sites in Nepal. And there's a lot of mention there of Guru Nanak
[Guest]: having come here, coming there, come there, not backed by any old texts. And they're confusing
[Guest]: it with the Udasi tradition who came in after the fall of the Sikh empire. And Rani Jindan,
[Guest]: actually, who was the wife of Ranjit Singh, was given refuge by Nepal Naresh. She was captured
[Guest]: in the Chunar Fort and from where she escapes. Thereafter, a lot of these Udasi shrines come up
[Guest]: because they have old Granth Sahib, the old handwritten Granth Sahib. Today, people are
[Guest]: just randomly going and everyone can say anything and they say that Guru Nanak came here and so on
[Guest]: and so forth. So like that, Guru Nanak has been sent to Rome, to Turkey, to every place. I was
[Guest]: in Rome and I met the Pope's office and we explored it. There's some reference someone wrote on the
[Guest]: website. And once you write something that becomes imprinted, right? So 10 years back, something was
[Guest]: written, 2006, about 13 years back. And some person from the Rome, he's quoted from the Vatican
[Guest]: and the Pope and his office deny it. We don't have any references here of that. So here you're
[Guest]: struggling with, someone writes just out of his faith and belief, nothing mentioned in texts of
[Guest]: 100 years. And then suddenly Guru Nanak has now reached Rome. Today, you find it hard to rationalise.
[Guest]: So in this whole context, we restricted ourselves to the oldest primary text because there itself,
[Guest]: if you can document that, it's a huge and humongous task because 70% of the area geographical expanse
[Guest]: is not accessible because it's all in conflict zones. You will be able to go to three Gurdwaras
[Guest]: in Pakistan. How will you go into Balochistan? How will you go to Hinglaj? Carry a camera to
[Guest]: Hinglaj temple? Who's going to allow you? You go behind an Indus region from Indus river in the
[Guest]: Baltistan area when he's coming from Kailash Mansarovar into Ladakh and then comes into Kashmir
[Guest]: and from that area, how will you get into behind Kargil? It sounds impossible. Leave alone Iraq
[Guest]: and Iran. Iraq, Iran, it's a different ballgame. How will you go to Mansarovar and take out a camera
[Guest]: to film? The Chinese government is not going to allow you. And then from there, walk up to the
[Guest]: Himachal border or walk up to Pangong Tso on the China side. How are you going to do it?
[Guest]: It seems impossible. And yet when you walked, it happened. So two questions for you. One is
[Amit Varma]: obviously clear to me that, you know, Nanak is one of the great travellers of those times,
[Amit Varma]: but unlike others like Yohun Sang and whoever, who are, you know, Marco Polo, who are celebrated
[Amit Varma]: as travellers, I think a little less of his travels is known probably because he didn't
[Amit Varma]: write about it himself. So one question is how did he actually get around? Those are the days
[Amit Varma]: before sort of mass transport exists. There are no flights, there are no trains, there's none of that.
[Amit Varma]: How is he getting around from place to place? What is he exactly doing? What is the nature of
[Amit Varma]: his quest? Like clearly he is engaging in dialogue with all kinds of people to get greater clarity
[Amit Varma]: and to spread his ideas. What is that process like? And the second question, which we can come
[Amit Varma]: to later, is that in these times where borders do exist, how did you manage to go to all these
[Guest]: places? So I don't know whether Nanak was meeting people to spread his ideas. I don't know. Some
[Guest]: people may not like what I'm saying. Because if we treat Nanak as a human being first, then there's
[Amit Varma]: a quest that he's on. In fact, one of the places you visited in Pakistan and photograph was Nanak
[Amit Varma]: Tibba, which is this mound where Nanak compiled the verses of Baba Farid. He collated it. He
[Guest]: collated it. So it's a quest for understanding from what. Absolutely. So one third of his life,
[Guest]: he doesn't move out. The other part of his life, the second or the third part of his life,
[Guest]: he goes on a quest for 22 years. In the last of the three phases of his life, he settles down in
[Guest]: Kartarpur. My sense is, this is purely my sense, having travelled on these parts, and I've been
[Guest]: a person on a quest also, when you're travelling, you're meeting so many people, a lot of things,
[Guest]: you're congregating, you're listening, you're imparting, you're hearing, but it's a two-way
[Guest]: process. You can't just be giving, giving, giving. It's a two-way process. If you treat Nanak as a
[Guest]: human being, the process of growth happens by hearing and imparting. Is there a mapping of
[Amit Varma]: that growth? Like, do we have a sense of how his thinking changed during this quest? Yeah,
[Guest]: so just let me just complete this. So then you come to the third part of his life, where he
[Guest]: settled on Kartarpur. I think that's where he started getting a congregation. That's where he
[Guest]: passed the betan. So I always think about it. Why is it that the Kabir Panthis did not have a
[Guest]: structured group that following? I mean, theoretically, Kabir Panthis could have also
[Guest]: formed an empire at one point of time, like the Sikhs did it. I think that military aspect came
[Guest]: much later. But it was because Nanak and Kabir had one, they were similar, but they did one thing
[Guest]: different. Nanak passed a leadership betan to the second guru, and betan passed down for 10 gurus.
[Guest]: Kabir did not pass him. So Kabir only remained at a realm where he was a bit less hardened.
[Guest]: So what I'm coming to is that Nanak was on a quest, he traveled, and he traveled on a two-way
[Guest]: process. But where was he traveling is the question. If you look at the structure in his
[Guest]: mappings, wherever we've been, there is a spiritual congregation in that place where he was going to
[Guest]: go, of that time. Spiritual congregation either associated with myth, reality, but people were
[Guest]: coming there. For him, interaction with people was the most important. Whether it was at Haridwar,
[Guest]: he gave the profound message of, if you're doing shraddh, if you're giving water to your parents
[Guest]: who passed away, or your forefathers, and if that can reach by putting the water towards the sun
[Guest]: to that passed away generation, then I can turn the other way around and water my fields in Punjab,
[Guest]: and this water should reach smaller distance here. So he was trying to rationalize. Basically,
[Guest]: he was going to places where people would congregate. And that took him then to places
[Guest]: of Islamic, Sufi, Jain, Buddhist, a lot of Hindu sites, Jogis, and he would congregate with them.
[Guest]: So when you understand that, then you start questioning, okay, how did he travel then?
[Guest]: Not a rocket science. Not a rocket science at all. From Punjab, people were traveling to Makkah.
[Guest]: How were they traveling? There were two routes. One would get them along the Indus,
[Guest]: maybe get onto a boat, maybe walk down. You can do about 20 kilometers a day.
[Guest]: And you get down to Sindh. From Sindh, you go via Balochistan into Iran, and then you reach
[Guest]: to the desert route into Makkah. The other one was you go down into the Arabian Sea and take a
[Guest]: boat from there and sail into Makkah. Both are possible. People were doing it. So Nanak also did
[Guest]: that same thing for a certain period of his time. But the difference was that they would come back,
[Guest]: and he went on the old pilgrimage route to Baghdad, but people from Baghdad would also come.
[Guest]: From there, he turned into Afghanistan. People would from Afghanistan also go that way. He came
[Guest]: on that route. People from India would go to Mansarovar, Kailash. From time immemorial,
[Guest]: they're going. The Sidh used to sit there. The Nath yogis used to sit there. And he went along
[Guest]: from the Badrinath area, along the passes into Kailash and Mansarovar. It's just a few days'
[Guest]: trek. People were doing it. Through Shivkila Pass, they went from there. So if you really
[Guest]: break down his travels, which on a macro level looks like a huge landscape, actually break into
[Guest]: small chunks, it's all doable. But he was only going to places where spiritualists congregate.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it's a 22 years' travel. And do you have a sense of his intellectual evolution
[Amit Varma]: in this period? Like he's going to all of these places, he's talking to all of these people,
[Amit Varma]: he's learning, he's assimilating knowledge and ways of thinking. How does this influence what
[Guest]: Sikhism becomes? It's a hard question for me to answer. And it's getting into a realm of any
[Guest]: opinion I'll give could touch people on the wrong side. But I'm just saying that if we treat Nanak
[Guest]: as a human, if we treat, then every human has an evolution process. Nanak was a spiritually
[Guest]: elevated person right from his childhood. He was having conversations around certain mundane tasks
[Guest]: about religious practices. Yes, he was absolutely evolved. But him meeting Mardana, and then bringing
[Guest]: in the musical knowledge, and then the two walking into Islamic sites, Sufi sites, different places,
[Guest]: of course, he would have assimilated. I'm not comparing myself with any Nanak. I'm not one.
[Guest]: But I know when I've travelled, the good chunk of my career that I spent in the corporate world,
[Guest]: where I was meeting people with a different mindset was still making me learn. But this
[Guest]: path and this journey has made me more learned, more evolved. I'm nowhere near Nanak. But it's
[Guest]: made me a different person who I am. When you meet and interact with people of different faiths,
[Guest]: you will understand the quest of Nanak was not Gurdwaras, there were none at that time.
[Guest]: Quest was something different. And to understand Nanak, you will have to understand Jainism,
[Guest]: you will have to understand Buddhism, you will have to understand Vedanta, you'll have to
[Guest]: understand the six philosophical systems, you will have to understand the Nath Jogis,
[Guest]: you will have to understand the Sufis, you'll have to understand Baba Farid, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So when he goes to Pakpattan, and he sits there, the 11th descendant of the Gaddi Naseen of Baba
[Guest]: Farid, because Baba Farid was 250 years before him, and beautiful Punjabi verses he writes.
[Guest]: He collates it. Why does he collate it? Because he finds a similarity in their mindsets.
[Guest]: In fact, the most valuable contribution in Punjabi poetry of Baba Farid is by Nanak that he collated
[Guest]: it. This was going through by oral traditions. In fact, all the works of Baba Farid that have
[Guest]: been done later on in Shahamukhi, which is the Urdu script, much later are all taken from the
[Guest]: Granth Sahib, because Nanak documented it. Nanak documented Kabir's verses. Bijak came much later,
[Guest]: which today people say is Bijak is Kabir's work. Go into the Granth Sahib, and there's a repository
[Guest]: of Kabir's writings. And that's the beauty of what he was doing. So could he be doing that without
[Amit Varma]: evolving? I find it hard to accept. At one level, I'm thinking Nanak could easily as he traveled,
[Amit Varma]: have done a podcast called The Seen and The Unseen and documented all these dialogues in
[Amit Varma]: audio form. But alas, there was no technology back then. So to get back to the second question,
[Amit Varma]: I ask, at a practical level, like we're recording this on March 12, you decided you'll do India last,
[Amit Varma]: you are about to finish India, you did all the other countries, you did all the travel,
[Amit Varma]: you went to these conflict zones, you went to Baluchistan, you went to Iran, Iraq, you went
[Amit Varma]: everywhere. How was that experience like both in terms of getting permissions and to other places
[Amit Varma]: where Nanak traveled, where Nanak Panti is simply not there, there's no trace of it, he only happened
[Guest]: to go there. Traveling into these places is very tough. You cannot retrace Guru Nanak's travels the
[Guest]: way he traveled. It's impossible today. We're talking about sovereign nations. I cannot travel
[Guest]: in that sequential manner, but I can get the data and can stitch it so that you and the next
[Guest]: generation when they're looking at, they see it sequentially. That's the only way it's possible.
[Guest]: But sovereign nations, there are a lot of ifs and buts, especially if we're trying to do
[Guest]: photography and videography. Is it going with a team and a crew? When I did my Sikh legacy in
[Guest]: Pakistan, I just had my camera and I just had my passion. But now you've got to go with a team.
[Guest]: And that's a very different ballgame. And when you get inside the country, first and foremost,
[Guest]: the barrier is how will you get inside? How deep can you go? How will you enable it? There's some
[Guest]: countries where the permission is not going to come to you. You just have to do it as a stealth
[Guest]: mission. Risk your life and just do it as a stealth mission. Some countries, the permission
[Guest]: will come to you, but may not come to you deep inside. Some countries, visas will be a big
[Guest]: problem. I've faced a lot of problems, a lot of visas in many places. India might sound to be the
[Guest]: easiest, but what one does not realize is that India, I have a Government of India's approval
[Guest]: from Ministry of Culture, but when you're traveling, every temple has its own management.
[Unknown]: They don't recognize the Government of India's letter. Right? Everyone's a king out here. Every
[Guest]: state is different. You might have the Government of India's approval letter from Ministry of
[Guest]: Culture, but BJP may not be in a power in a certain state. They don't care about that letter.
[Guest]: So there's this huge mix of challenges and you've got to manage that. Even in a country where life
[Guest]: is not a threat in India, right? You can imagine how tough it becomes. So that's the first part to
[Guest]: the question. So your second question was that the Nanak Panthis, were they there, right? Look,
[Guest]: when Nanak was traveling, the Nanak's panth was not being formed. Nanak in his first part of his
[Guest]: life was not creating any followership. Second part, he was on a quest. Third part, when he came
[Guest]: and settled down at Kartarpur, people started flocking around him because he now had immense
[Guest]: value to offer. I think the panth starts emerging from there. The community starts emerging from
[Guest]: there. Till then, he's just moving around. He's making an impact. It's the betan that he passes
[Guest]: on to the second guru and that lasts on for 250 years in the name of Nanak creates a bigger and
[Guest]: bigger community up till Afghanistan, deep inside India, Maharashtra and so on and so forth. That
[Amit Varma]: becomes the Nanak Panthis. So, you know, we're kind of running out of time. So my sort of final
[Amit Varma]: question here would be that, you know, in the process of immersing yourself in Sikh traditions
[Amit Varma]: or Nanak Panthis traditions, first in Pakistan and now on this entire trip, how has a way that
[Amit Varma]: you look at your faith changed, your community changed? And if any, what is a message that you'd
[Amit Varma]: like to sort of give to the Sikh community at this point in time about how they look at their
[Guest]: own history and their own heritage? Well, I think the learning is only a reaffirmation of the most
[Guest]: fundamental message of Nanak of oneness. There's nothing different, right? It's just one message,
[Guest]: simple message of oneness that we are one. And I think it's free to have the ability to
[Guest]: understand that all can coexist in a bouquet of oneness. That's the only message that I'll take,
[Guest]: because I have seen the love and affection and the challenges that have been overcome
[Guest]: by the people in Afghanistan, in Iran and Iraq who have embraced us. If not for them and not
[Guest]: their feeling for oneness, this project would not have been done. That's my takeaway from it.
[Guest]: And the message to my communities also is that it's the message of oneness. There's no difference,
[Guest]: right? So we need to have the ability to embrace everyone. It's the need of the day. The world is
[Amit Varma]: already broken up. And does that also mean being honest and self-critical and recognising the
[Amit Varma]: rigidity that has crept into the faith over the last few decades? Well, every faith goes into
[Guest]: all kinds of rigidity, all kinds. There's nothing new. It's not rocket science. Every faith evolves
[Guest]: that way, right? Religion is a defining of a boundary around spirituality. So I am a proud
[Guest]: adherent of the Khalsa tradition. I wear a turban. I keep uncut beard. I'm proud of it because of my
[Guest]: culture, my history, my tradition, and I will die like this. But that's not any reason for me to not
[Guest]: embrace anyone else. Your culture, a Sikh in Afghanistan may have a different culture. In my
[Guest]: journey, I met Assamese Sikhs. I met Nanak Panthis of Oriya origin in Orissa, right? And they don't
[Guest]: speak my Punjabi language, but yet they are believer in the faith, right? And they don't look
[Guest]: like me. So who am I to pass judgment on them? It's the only thing that I've learned, right? I think
[Guest]: the key message is that the need of the hour, the need of any place in the world, even within our own
[Guest]: country at this point of time is that we need to learn to live with the oneness. There's a lot of
[Guest]: damage that's happened to the underlying structure of the coexistence, and we need to rise above that.
[Guest]: And Nanak's message in this time is very important for that. And I'm often reminded of the prayer we
[Guest]: used to read in our school, in Doon School when I was there, Rabindranath take orders, right?
[Amit Varma]: But the world has not been broken up by... Into fragments by narrow domestic walls.
[Guest]: Yeah, into that heaven of freedom, let my country awake. I think that's the only message.
[Amit Varma]: I think Nanak was striving for that. And finally, you've finished shooting most of Allegory,
[Amit Varma]: which is a 30 part documentary series, but there's a lot of work left on post production.
[Amit Varma]: You're going to Lahore soon to record again with Salima Khwaja. You still need to raise funds for
[Amit Varma]: some of that. If any of the listeners of the show would want to contribute to your project,
[Guest]: how can they do so? Where should they go? Yeah, so there is a charitable organization
[Guest]: that's supporting this project within India. It's a global project. We're managing it out
[Guest]: of Singapore, but we are in need for fund. These projects for five years are only running because
[Guest]: of people who support us, right? And if anyone wants to support, there are ways of doing it.
[Guest]: We have a tax exempt organization that's helping us as a third party organization.
[Guest]: At this point, I will simply request that my email could be given and they can contact me on that.
[Guest]: Or my WhatsApp, it's the Singapore number, which is plus 6598326508. They can drop me a line on
[Guest]: that or they can email me and you can give my email at the bottom of the podcast.
[Guest]: Both the email and the number will be in the show notes.
[Guest]: Yeah. And anyone can contact me and we can take it from there. But we are looking for support.
[Guest]: I mean, there are no organizations behind this project. This is a quest of a madman.
[Guest]: And we have proven ourselves as a team long enough for five years that we are able to generate stuff.
[Guest]: And if people who feel that there's a space for this narrative, it's not about Sikhs. It's about
[Guest]: humanity. All these narratives, my books on Sikh legacy in Pakistan are about humanity and equally
[Guest]: should impress and motivate any non-Sikh to delve into them. Similarly, Gunanak's message has to be
[Guest]: appreciated by everyone and anyone who comes forward can reach out here.
[Amit Varma]: And even if we can't exactly live in borderless geographies,
[Amit Varma]: we can live in borderless minds. Thank you so much for coming on the show, Amardeep.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for giving me an opportunity. I appreciate that.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop on over to your nearest bookstore,
[Amit Varma]: online or offline and buy The Lost Heritage and The Quest Continues by Amardeep Singh.
[Amit Varma]: You can also go to lostheritagebook.com for more information.
[Amit Varma]: His documentary and other links such as the social media links will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to follow me on Twitter, you can do so at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A
[Amit Varma]: to browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen. Hop on over to seenunseen.in or thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and The Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Do check out their awesome public policy courses at takshashila.org.in. Thank you for listening.